In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
Now the earth was formless and desolate, and there was darkness upon the surface of the watery deep, and God’s active force was moving about over the surface of the waters.
And God said: “Let there be light.” Then there was light.
After that God saw that the light was good, and God began to divide the light from the darkness.
God called the light Day, but the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, a first day.
Then God said: “Let there be an expanse between the waters, and let there be a division between the waters and the waters.”
Then God went on to make the expanse and divided the waters beneath the expanse from the waters above the expanse. And it was so.
God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a second day.
Then God said: “Let the waters under the heavens be collected together into one place, and let the dry land appear.” And it was so.
God called the dry land Earth, but the collecting of the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.
Then God said: “Let the earth cause grass to sprout, seed-bearing plants and fruit trees according to their kinds, yielding fruit along with seed on the earth.” And it was so.
And the earth began to produce grass, seed-bearing plants and trees yielding fruit along with seed, according to their kinds. Then God saw that it was good.
And there was evening and there was morning, a third day.
Then God said: “Let there be luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to make a division between the day and the night, and they will serve as signs for seasons and for days and years.
They will serve as luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth.” And it was so.
And God went on to make the two great luminaries, the greater luminary for dominating the day and the lesser luminary for dominating the night, and also the stars.
Thus God put them in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth
and to dominate by day and by night and to make a division between the light and the darkness. Then God saw that it was good.
And there was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.
Then God said: “Let the waters swarm with living creatures, and let flying creatures fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens.”
And God created the great sea creatures and all living creatures that move and swarm in the waters according to their kinds and every winged flying creature according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
With that God blessed them, saying: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the waters of the sea, and let the flying creatures become many in the earth.”
And there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.
Then God said: “Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds, domestic animals and creeping animals and wild animals of the earth according to their kinds.” And it was so.
And God went on to make the wild animals of the earth according to their kinds and the domestic animals according to their kinds and all the creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.
Then God said: “Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth.”
And God went on to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them.
Further, God blessed them, and God said to them: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth.”
Then God said: “Here I have given to you every seed-bearing plant that is on the entire earth and every tree with seed-bearing fruit. Let them serve as food for you.
And to every wild animal of the earth and to every flying creature of the heavens and to everything moving on the earth in which there is life, I have given all green vegetation for food.” And it was so.
After that God saw everything he had made, and look! it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.
Thus the heavens and the earth and everything in them were completed.
And by the seventh day, God had completed the work that he had been doing, and he began to rest on the seventh day from all his work that he had been doing.
And God went on to bless the seventh day and to declare it sacred, for on it God has been resting from all the work that he has created, all that he purposed to make.
This is a history of the heavens and the earth in the time they were created, in the day that Jehovah God made earth and heaven.
No bush of the field was yet on the earth and no vegetation of the field had begun sprouting, because Jehovah God had not made it rain on the earth and there was no man to cultivate the ground.
But a mist would go up from the earth, and it watered the entire surface of the ground.
And Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living person.
Further, Jehovah God planted a garden in Eʹden, toward the east; and there he put the man whom he had formed.
Thus Jehovah God made to grow out of the ground every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food and also the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and bad.
Now there was a river flowing out of Eʹden to water the garden, and from there it divided into four rivers.
The name of the first is Piʹshon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Havʹi·lah, where there is gold.
The gold of that land is good. Bdellium gum and onyx stone are also there.
The name of the second river is Giʹhon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Cush.
The name of the third river is Hidʹde·kel; it is the one going to the east of As·syrʹi·a. And the fourth river is the Eu·phraʹtes.
Jehovah God took the man and settled him in the garden of Eʹden to cultivate it and to take care of it.
Jehovah God also gave this command to the man: “From every tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction.
But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.”
Then Jehovah God said: “It is not good for the man to continue to be alone. I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.”
Now Jehovah God had been forming from the ground every wild animal of the field and every flying creature of the heavens, and he began bringing them to the man to see what he would call each one; and whatever the man would call each living creature, that became its name.
So the man named all the domestic animals and the flying creatures of the heavens and every wild animal of the field, but for man there was no helper as a complement of him.
So Jehovah God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep, and while he was sleeping, he took one of his ribs and then closed up the flesh over its place.
And Jehovah God built the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman, and he brought her to the man.
Then the man said:
That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh.
And both of them continued to be naked, the man and his wife; yet they were not ashamed.
Now the serpent was the most cautious of all the wild animals of the field that Jehovah God had made. So it said to the woman: “Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?”
At this the woman said to the serpent: “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden.
But God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: ‘You must not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will die.’”
At this the serpent said to the woman: “You certainly will not die.
For God knows that in the very day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.”
Consequently, the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was something desirable to the eyes, yes, the tree was pleasing to look at. So she began taking of its fruit and eating it. Afterward, she also gave some to her husband when he was with her, and he began eating it.
Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized that they were naked. So they sewed fig leaves together and made loin coverings for themselves.
Later they heard the voice of Jehovah God as he was walking in the garden about the breezy part of the day, and the man and his wife hid from the face of Jehovah God among the trees of the garden.
And Jehovah God kept calling to the man and saying to him: “Where are you?”
Finally he said: “I heard your voice in the garden, but I was afraid because I was naked, so I hid myself.”
At that he said: “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree from which I commanded you not to eat?”
The man said: “The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, so I ate.”
Jehovah God then said to the woman: “What is this you have done?” The woman replied: “The serpent deceived me, so I ate.”
Then Jehovah God said to the serpent: “Because you have done this, you are the cursed one out of all the domestic animals and out of all the wild animals of the field. On your belly you will go, and you will eat dust all the days of your life.
And I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will crush your head, and you will strike him in the heel.”
To the woman he said: “I will greatly increase the pain of your pregnancy; in pain you will give birth to children, and your longing will be for your husband, and he will dominate you.”
And to Adam he said: “Because you listened to your wife’s voice and ate from the tree concerning which I gave you this command, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground on your account. In pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life.
It will grow thorns and thistles for you, and you must eat the vegetation of the field.
In the sweat of your face you will eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will return.”
After this Adam named his wife Eve, because she was to become the mother of everyone living.
And Jehovah God made long garments from skins for Adam and for his wife, to clothe them.
Jehovah God then said: “Here the man has become like one of us in knowing good and bad. Now in order that he may not put his hand out and take fruit also from the tree of life and eat and live forever,—”
With that Jehovah God expelled him from the garden of Eʹden to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken.
So he drove the man out, and he posted at the east of the garden of Eʹden the cherubs and the flaming blade of a sword that was turning continuously to guard the way to the tree of life.
Now Adam had sexual relations with his wife Eve, and she became pregnant. When she gave birth to Cain, she said: “I have produced a male child with the help of Jehovah.”
Later she again gave birth, to his brother Abel.
After some time, Cain brought some fruits of the land as an offering to Jehovah.
But Abel brought some firstlings of his flock, including their fat. While Jehovah looked with favor on Abel and on his offering,
he did not look with any favor on Cain and on his offering. So Cain grew hot with anger and was dejected.
Then Jehovah said to Cain: “Why are you so angry and dejected?
If you turn to doing good, will you not be restored to favor? But if you do not turn to doing good, sin is crouching at the door, and its craving is to dominate you; but will you get the mastery over it?”
After that Cain said to his brother Abel: “Let us go over into the field.” So while they were in the field, Cain assaulted his brother Abel and killed him.
Later on, Jehovah said to Cain: “Where is your brother Abel?” and he said: “I do not know. Am I my brother’s guardian?”
At this He said: “What have you done? Listen! Your brother’s blood is crying out to me from the ground.
And now you are cursed in banishment from the ground that has opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from your hand.
When you cultivate the ground, it will not give you back its produce. You will become a wanderer and a fugitive in the earth.”
At this Cain said to Jehovah: “The punishment for my error is too great to bear.
Today you are driving me from the land, and I will be hidden from your face; and I will become a wanderer and a fugitive on the earth, and anyone who finds me will certainly kill me.”
So Jehovah said to him: “For that reason, anyone who kills Cain will suffer vengeance seven times.”
Then Cain went away from before Jehovah and took up residence in the land of Exile, to the east of Eʹden.
Afterward Cain had sexual relations with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Eʹnoch. Then he engaged in building a city and named the city after his son Eʹnoch.
Later Iʹrad was born to Eʹnoch. And Iʹrad became father to Me·huʹja·el, and Me·huʹja·el became father to Me·thuʹsha·el, and Me·thuʹsha·el became father to Laʹmech.
Laʹmech took two wives for himself. The name of the first was Aʹdah, and the name of the second was Zilʹlah.
Aʹdah gave birth to Jaʹbal. He was the founder of those who dwell in tents and have livestock.
His brother’s name was Juʹbal. He was the founder of all those who play the harp and the pipe.
Also, Zilʹlah gave birth to Tuʹbal-cain, who forged every sort of tool of copper and iron. And the sister of Tuʹbal-cain was Naʹa·mah.
Then Laʹmech composed these words for his wives Aʹdah and Zilʹlah:
If  times Cain is to be avenged,
Adam again had sexual relations with his wife, and she gave birth to a son. She named him Seth because, as she said, “God has appointed for me another offspring in place of Abel, because Cain killed him.”
There was also born to Seth a son, and he named him Eʹnosh. At that time people began calling on the name of Jehovah.
This is the book of Adam’s history. In the day that God created Adam, he made him in the likeness of God.
Male and female he created them. On the day they were created, he blessed them and named them Man.
Adam lived for  years and then became father to a son in his likeness, in his image, and he named him Seth.
After becoming father to Seth, Adam lived for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Adam’s life amounted to  years, and then he died.
Seth lived for  years and then became father to Eʹnosh.
After becoming father to Eʹnosh, Seth lived for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Seth amounted to  years, and then he died.
Eʹnosh lived for  years and then became father to Keʹnan.
After becoming father to Keʹnan, Eʹnosh lived for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Eʹnosh amounted to  years, and then he died.
Keʹnan lived for  years and then became father to Ma·halʹa·lel.
After becoming father to Ma·halʹa·lel, Keʹnan lived for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Keʹnan amounted to  years, and then he died.
Ma·halʹa·lel lived for  years and then became father to Jaʹred.
After becoming father to Jaʹred, Ma·halʹa·lel lived for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Ma·halʹa·lel amounted to  years, and then he died.
Jaʹred lived for  years and then became father to Eʹnoch.
After becoming father to Eʹnoch, Jaʹred lived for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Jaʹred amounted to  years, and then he died.
Eʹnoch lived for  years and then became father to Me·thuʹse·lah.
After becoming father to Me·thuʹse·lah, Eʹnoch continued to walk with the true God for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Eʹnoch amounted to  years.
Eʹnoch kept walking with the true God. Then he was no more, for God took him.
Me·thuʹse·lah lived for  years and then became father to Laʹmech.
After becoming father to Laʹmech, Me·thuʹse·lah lived for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Me·thuʹse·lah amounted to  years, and then he died.
Laʹmech lived for  years and then became father to a son.
He named him Noah, saying: “This one will bring us comfort from our labor and from the painful toil of our hands because of the ground that Jehovah has cursed.”
After becoming father to Noah, Laʹmech lived for  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Laʹmech amounted to  years, and then he died.
After Noah reached  years of age, he became father to Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.
Now when men started to grow in number on the surface of the ground and daughters were born to them,
the sons of the true God began to notice that the daughters of men were beautiful. So they began taking as wives all whom they chose.
Then Jehovah said: “My spirit will not tolerate man indefinitely, because he is only flesh. Accordingly, his days will amount to  years.”
The Nephʹi·lim were on the earth in those days and afterward. During that time the sons of the true God continued to have relations with the daughters of men, and these bore sons to them. They were the mighty ones of old times, the men of fame.
Consequently, Jehovah saw that man’s wickedness was great on the earth and that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time.
Jehovah regretted that he had made men on the earth, and his heart was saddened.
So Jehovah said: “I am going to wipe men whom I have created off the surface of the ground, man together with domestic animals, creeping animals, and flying creatures of the heavens, for I regret that I have made them.”
But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.
This is the history of Noah.
In time Noah became father to three sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.
But the earth had become ruined in the sight of the true God, and the earth was filled with violence.
Yes, God looked upon the earth, and it was ruined; all flesh had ruined its way on the earth.
After that God said to Noah: “I have decided to put an end to all flesh, because the earth is full of violence on account of them, so I am bringing them to ruin together with the earth.
Make for yourself an ark from resinous wood. You will make compartments in the ark and cover it with tar inside and outside.
This is how you will make it: The ark should be  cubits long,  cubits wide, and  cubits high.
You will make a window for light for the ark, one cubit from the top. You should put the entrance of the ark in its side and make it with a lower deck, a second deck, and a third deck.
“As for me, I am going to bring floodwaters upon the earth to destroy from under the heavens all flesh that has the breath of life. Everything on the earth will perish.
And I am establishing my covenant with you, and you must go into the ark, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons’ wives with you.
And bring into the ark two of every sort of living creature in order to preserve them alive with you, a male and a female;
of the flying creatures according to their kinds, the domestic animals according to their kinds, and all creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds, two of each will go in there to you to preserve them alive.
For your part, you are to collect and take with you every kind of food to eat, to serve as food for you and for the animals.”
And Noah did according to all that God had commanded him. He did just so.
After that Jehovah said to Noah: “Go into the ark, you and all your household, because you are the one I have found to be righteous before me among this generation.
You must take with you every kind of clean animal by sevens, the male and its mate; and of every animal that is not clean just two, the male and its mate;
also of the flying creatures of the sky by sevens, male and female, to preserve their offspring alive over all the earth.
For in just seven days, I will make it rain on the earth for  days and  nights, and I will wipe from the surface of the ground every living thing that I have made.”
Then Noah did everything that Jehovah had commanded him.
Noah was  years old when the floodwaters came upon the earth.
So Noah, along with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives, went into the ark ahead of the floodwaters.
Of every clean animal and of every animal that is not clean and of the flying creatures and of everything that moves on the ground,
they went inside the ark to Noah by twos, male and female, just as God had commanded Noah.
And seven days later the floodwaters came upon the earth.
In the th year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the th day of the month, on that day all the springs of the vast watery deep burst open and the floodgates of the heavens were opened.
And the rain poured down on the earth for  days and  nights.
On that very day, Noah went into the ark along with his sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth, and his wife and the three wives of his sons.
They went in with every wild animal according to its kind, and every domestic animal according to its kind, and every creeping animal of the earth according to its kind, and every flying creature according to its kind, every bird, every winged creature.
They kept going to Noah inside the ark, two by two, of every sort of flesh that has the breath of life.
So they went in, male and female of every sort of flesh, just as God had commanded him. After that Jehovah shut the door behind him.
The flooding continued for  days on the earth, and the waters kept increasing and began carrying the ark, and it was floating high above the earth.
The waters became overwhelming and kept increasing greatly upon the earth, but the ark floated on the surface of the waters.
The waters overwhelmed the earth so greatly that all the tall mountains under the whole heavens were covered.
The waters rose up to  cubits above the mountains.
So all living creatures that were moving on the earth perished—the flying creatures, the domestic animals, the wild animals, the swarming creatures, and all mankind.
Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died.
So He wiped every living thing from the surface of the earth, including man, animals, creeping animals, and the flying creatures of the sky. They were all wiped off the earth; only Noah and those with him in the ark survived.
And the waters continued overwhelming the earth for  days.
But God gave attention to Noah and to all the wild animals and domestic animals that were with him in the ark, and God caused a wind to blow over the earth, and the waters began to subside.
The springs of the watery deep and the floodgates of the heavens were stopped up, so the rain from the heavens stopped falling.
Then the waters began to recede progressively from the earth. By the end of  days, the waters had subsided.
In the seventh month, on the th day of the month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of Arʹa·rat.
And the waters were steadily decreasing until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first of the month, the tops of the mountains appeared.
So at the end of  days, Noah opened the window that he had made in the ark
and sent out a raven; it continued flying outside and returning, until the waters dried off the earth.
Later he sent out a dove to see whether the waters had receded from the surface of the ground.
The dove did not find any resting-place to perch, so it returned to him into the ark because the waters were still covering the surface of the whole earth. So he reached his hand out and brought it inside the ark.
He waited seven more days, and once again he sent out the dove from the ark.
When the dove came to him toward evening, he saw that there was a freshly plucked olive leaf in its bill! So Noah knew that the waters had receded from the earth.
He waited still another seven days. Then he sent out the dove, but it did not return to him anymore.
Now in the st year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the waters had drained from the earth; and Noah removed the covering of the ark and saw that the surface of the ground was drying.
In the second month, on the th day of the month, the earth had dried off.
God now said to Noah:
“Go out of the ark, you, your wife, your sons, and your sons’ wives.
Bring out with you all the living creatures of every sort of flesh, of the flying creatures and of the animals and of all the creeping animals of the earth, that they may multiply on the earth and be fruitful and become many on the earth.”
So Noah went out, together with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives.
Every living creature, every creeping animal and every flying creature, everything that moves on the earth, went out of the ark by families.
Then Noah built an altar to Jehovah and took some of all the clean animals and of all the clean flying creatures and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
And Jehovah began to smell a pleasing aroma. So Jehovah said in his heart: “Never again will I curse the ground on man’s account, for the inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up; and never again will I strike down every living thing as I have done.
From now on, the earth will never cease to have seed-sowing and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, and day and night.”
God went on to bless Noah and his sons and to say to them: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth.
A fear of you and a terror of you will continue upon every living creature of the earth and upon every flying creature of the heavens, upon everything that moves on the ground and upon all the fish of the sea. They are now given into your hand.
Every moving animal that is alive may serve as food for you. Just as I gave you the green vegetation, I give them all to you.
Only flesh with its life—its blood—you must not eat.
Besides that, I will demand an accounting for your lifeblood. I will demand an accounting from every living creature; and from each man I will demand an accounting for the life of his brother.
Anyone shedding man’s blood, by man will his own blood be shed, for in God’s image He made man.
As for you, be fruitful and become many, and increase abundantly on the earth and multiply.”
Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him:
“I am now establishing my covenant with you and with your offspring after you,
and with every living creature that is with you, the birds, the animals, and all the living creatures of the earth with you, all those that came out of the ark—every living creature of the earth.
Yes, I establish my covenant with you: Never again will all flesh be destroyed by the waters of a flood, and never again will a flood bring the earth to ruin.”
And God added: “This is the sign of the covenant that I am making between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for all future generations.
I put my rainbow in the cloud, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and the earth.
Whenever I bring a cloud over the earth, then the rainbow will certainly appear in the cloud.
And I will certainly remember my covenant that I made between me and you and every living creature of every kind; and never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all flesh.
And the rainbow will occur in the cloud, and I will certainly see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of every kind on the earth.”
God repeated to Noah: “This is the sign of the covenant that I establish between me and all flesh that is on the earth.”
Noah’s sons who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth. Ham later became the father of Caʹnaan.
These three were Noah’s sons, and all the earth’s population came from them and spread abroad.
Now Noah started off as a farmer, and he planted a vineyard.
When he drank of the wine, he became intoxicated, and he uncovered himself inside his tent.
Ham, the father of Caʹnaan, saw his father’s nakedness, and he told his two brothers outside.
So Shem and Jaʹpheth took a garment and put it upon both their shoulders and walked in backward. Thus they covered their father’s nakedness while their faces were turned away, and they did not see their father’s nakedness.
When Noah woke up from his wine and learned what his youngest son had done to him,
he said:
And he added:
Let God grant ample space to Jaʹpheth,
Noah continued to live for  years after the Flood.
So all the days of Noah amounted to  years, and he died.
This is the history of Noah’s sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.
The sons of Jaʹpheth were Goʹmer, Maʹgog, Maʹda·i, Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, Meʹshech, and Tiʹras.
The sons of Goʹmer were Ashʹke·naz, Riʹphath, and To·garʹmah.
The sons of Jaʹvan were E·liʹshah, Tarʹshish, Kitʹtim, and Doʹda·nim.
From these the inhabitants of the islands spread into their lands, according to their languages and their families and by their nations.
The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizʹra·im, Put, and Caʹnaan.
The sons of Cush were Seʹba, Havʹi·lah, Sabʹtah, Raʹa·mah, and Sabʹte·ca.
Cush became father to Nimʹrod. He was the first to become a mighty one on the earth.
He became a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah. That is why there is a saying: “Just like Nimʹrod, a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah.”
The beginning of his kingdom was Baʹbel, Eʹrech, Acʹcad, and Calʹneh, in the land of Shiʹnar.
From that land he went into As·syrʹi·a and built Ninʹe·veh, Re·hoʹboth-Ir, Caʹlah,
and Reʹsen, between Ninʹe·veh and Caʹlah: This is the great city.
Mizʹra·im became father to Luʹdim, Anʹa·mim, Le·haʹbim, Naph·tuʹhim,
Path·ruʹsim, Cas·luʹhim (from whom the Phi·lisʹtines came), and Caphʹto·rim.
Caʹnaan became father to Siʹdon, his firstborn, and Heth,
as well as the Jebʹu·site, the Amʹor·ite, the Girʹga·shite,
the Hiʹvite, the Arkʹite, the Siʹnite,
the Arʹvad·ite, the Zemʹa·rite, and the Haʹmath·ite. Afterward, the families of the Caʹnaan·ites were scattered.
So the boundary of the Caʹnaan·ites was from Siʹdon as far as Geʹrar, near Gazʹa, as far as Sodʹom, Go·morʹrah, Adʹmah, and Ze·boiʹim, near Laʹsha.
These were the sons of Ham according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.
Children were also born to Shem, the forefather of all the sons of Eʹber and the brother of Jaʹpheth the oldest.
The sons of Shem were Eʹlam, Asʹshur, Ar·pachʹshad, Lud, and Aʹram.
The sons of Aʹram were Uz, Hul, Geʹther, and Mash.
Ar·pachʹshad became father to Sheʹlah, and Sheʹlah became father to Eʹber.
Two sons were born to Eʹber. The name of the one was Peʹleg, because in his lifetime the earth was divided. The name of his brother was Jokʹtan.
Jokʹtan became father to Al·moʹdad, Sheʹleph, Ha·zar·maʹveth, Jeʹrah,
Ha·doʹram, Uʹzal, Dikʹlah,
Oʹbal, A·bimʹa·el, Sheʹba,
Oʹphir, Havʹi·lah, and Joʹbab; all of these were the sons of Jokʹtan.
Their place of dwelling extended from Meʹsha as far as Seʹphar, the mountainous region of the East.
These were the sons of Shem according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.
These were the families of the sons of Noah according to their family lines and by their nations. From these the nations were spread abroad in the earth after the Flood.
Now all the earth continued to be of one language and of one set of words.
As they traveled eastward, they discovered a valley plain in the land of Shiʹnar, and they began dwelling there.
Then they said to one another: “Come! Let us make bricks and bake them with fire.” So they used bricks instead of stone, and bitumen as mortar.
They now said: “Come! Let us build a city for ourselves and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a celebrated name for ourselves, so that we will not be scattered over the entire face of the earth.”
Then Jehovah went down to see the city and the tower that the sons of men had built.
Jehovah then said: “Look! They are one people with one language, and this is what they have started to do. Now there is nothing that they may have in mind to do that will be impossible for them.
Come! Let us go down there and confuse their language in order that they may not understand one another’s language.”
So Jehovah scattered them from there over the entire face of the earth, and they gradually left off building the city.
That is why it was named Baʹbel, because there Jehovah confused the language of all the earth, and Jehovah scattered them from there over the entire face of the earth.
This is the history of Shem.
After becoming father to Ar·pachʹshad, Shem continued to live  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Ar·pachʹshad lived for  years and then became father to Sheʹlah.
After becoming father to Sheʹlah, Ar·pachʹshad continued to live  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Sheʹlah lived for  years and then became father to Eʹber.
After becoming father to Eʹber, Sheʹlah continued to live  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Eʹber lived for  years and then became father to Peʹleg.
After becoming father to Peʹleg, Eʹber continued to live  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Peʹleg lived for  years and then became father to Reʹu.
After becoming father to Reʹu, Peʹleg continued to live  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Reʹu lived for  years and then became father to Seʹrug.
After becoming father to Seʹrug, Reʹu continued to live  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Seʹrug lived for  years and then became father to Naʹhor.
After becoming father to Naʹhor, Seʹrug continued to live  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Naʹhor lived for  years and then became father to Teʹrah.
After becoming father to Teʹrah, Naʹhor continued to live  years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Teʹrah lived for  years, after which he became father to Aʹbram, Naʹhor, and Haʹran.
This is the history of Teʹrah.
While his father Teʹrah was still alive, Haʹran died in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chal·deʹans.
Aʹbram and Naʹhor took wives for themselves. The name of Aʹbram’s wife was Sarʹai, and the name of Naʹhor’s wife was Milʹcah, the daughter of Haʹran, the father of Milʹcah and Isʹcah.
Now Sarʹai was barren; she had no child.
Teʹrah then took Aʹbram his son and Lot his grandson, the son of Haʹran, and Sarʹai his daughter-in-law, the wife of Aʹbram his son, and they went with him out of Ur of the Chal·deʹans to go to the land of Caʹnaan. In time they came to Haʹran and began dwelling there.
The days of Teʹrah were  years. Then Teʹrah died in Haʹran.
And Jehovah said to Aʹbram: “Go out from your land and away from your relatives and from the house of your father to the land that I will show you.
I will make you a great nation, and I will bless you, and I will make your name great, and you will become a blessing.
I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who calls down evil on you, and all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed by means of you.”
So Aʹbram went just as Jehovah had told him, and Lot went with him. Aʹbram was  years old when he left Haʹran.
Aʹbram took his wife Sarʹai and Lot the son of his brother and all the goods that they had accumulated and the people whom they had acquired in Haʹran, and they set out for the land of Caʹnaan. When they reached the land of Caʹnaan,
Aʹbram traveled through the land as far as the site of Sheʹchem, near the big trees of Moʹreh. At that time the Caʹnaan·ites were in the land.
Jehovah then appeared to Aʹbram and said: “To your offspring I am going to give this land.” So he built an altar there to Jehovah, who had appeared to him.
Later he moved from there to the mountainous region east of Bethʹel and pitched his tent with Bethʹel on the west and Aʹi on the east. There he built an altar to Jehovah and began to call on the name of Jehovah.
Afterward, Aʹbram broke camp and journeyed toward the Negʹeb, moving his camp from one place to another.
Now a famine arose in the land, and Aʹbram went down toward Egypt to reside there for a while, because the famine in the land was severe.
As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to his wife Sarʹai: “Please listen! I know what a beautiful woman you are.
So when the Egyptians see you, they will surely say, ‘This is his wife.’ Then they will kill me but keep you alive.
Please say you are my sister, so that it may go well with me because of you, and my life will be spared.”
As soon as Aʹbram entered Egypt, the Egyptians noticed that the woman was very beautiful.
And the princes of Pharʹaoh also saw her, and they began praising her to Pharʹaoh, so that the woman was taken to the house of Pharʹaoh.
He treated Aʹbram well because of her, and he acquired sheep, cattle, male and female donkeys, male and female servants, and camels.
Then Jehovah struck Pharʹaoh and his household with severe plagues because of Sarʹai, Aʹbram’s wife.
So Pharʹaoh called Aʹbram and said: “What is this you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that she was your wife?
Why did you say, ‘She is my sister,’ so that I was about to take her as my wife? Here is your wife. Take her and go!”
So Pharʹaoh gave his men orders concerning him, and they sent him away with his wife and all that he had.
Aʹbram then went up out of Egypt to the Negʹeb, he and his wife and all that he had, together with Lot.
Aʹbram was very rich in livestock, silver, and gold.
He camped in one place after another as he traveled from the Negʹeb to Bethʹel, until he arrived at the place where his tent had been between Bethʹel and Aʹi,
to the place where he had previously built an altar. There Aʹbram called on the name of Jehovah.
Now Lot, who was traveling with Aʹbram, also owned sheep, cattle, and tents.
So the land did not allow for all of them to stay in the same place; their goods had become so many that they could no longer dwell together.
As a result, a quarrel arose between the herders of Aʹbram’s livestock and the herders of Lot’s livestock. (At that time the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites were dwelling in the land.)
So Aʹbram said to Lot: “Please, there should be no quarreling between me and you and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we are brothers.
Is not the whole land available to you? Please, separate from me. If you go to the left, then I will go to the right; but if you go to the right, then I will go to the left.”
So Lot raised his eyes and saw that the whole district of the Jordan was a well-watered region (before Jehovah destroyed Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah), like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt, as far as Zoʹar.
Then Lot chose for himself the whole district of the Jordan, and Lot moved his camp to the east. So they separated from each other.
Aʹbram lived in the land of Caʹnaan, but Lot lived among the cities of the district. Finally he set up his tent near Sodʹom.
Now the men of Sodʹom were wicked, gross sinners against Jehovah.
Jehovah said to Aʹbram, after Lot had separated from him: “Raise your eyes, please, and look from the place where you are, to the north and south, east and west,
because all the land that you see, I will give to you and your offspring as a lasting possession.
And I will make your offspring like the dust particles of the earth, so that if anyone could count the dust particles of the earth, then your offspring could be counted.
Get up, travel through the length and breadth of the land, for to you I am going to give it.”
So Aʹbram continued to live in tents. Later he came and dwelled among the big trees of Mamʹre, which are in Hebʹron, and there he built an altar to Jehovah.
Now in the days of Amʹra·phel king of Shiʹnar, Arʹi·och king of El·laʹsar, Ched·or·la·oʹmer king of Eʹlam, and Tiʹdal king of Goiʹim,
these made war with Beʹra king of Sodʹom, Birʹsha king of Go·morʹrah, Shiʹnab king of Adʹmah, Shem·eʹber king of Ze·boiʹim, and the king of Beʹla, that is, Zoʹar.
All of these joined forces at the Valley of Sidʹdim, that is, the Salt Sea.
They had served Ched·or·la·oʹmer for  years, but they rebelled in the th year.
So in the th year, Ched·or·la·oʹmer and the kings who were with him came and defeated the Rephʹa·im in Ashʹte·roth-kar·naʹim, the Zuʹzim in Ham, the Eʹmim in Shaʹveh-kir·i·a·thaʹim,
and the Horʹites in their mountain of Seʹir down to El-paʹran, which is at the wilderness.
Then they turned back and came to En-mishʹpat, that is, Kaʹdesh, and conquered the whole territory of the A·malʹek·ites and also the Amʹor·ites who were dwelling in Hazʹa·zon-taʹmar.
At this point, the king of Sodʹom went on the march, and also the king of Go·morʹrah, the king of Adʹmah, the king of Ze·boiʹim, and the king of Beʹla, that is, Zoʹar, and they drew up in battle formation against them in the Valley of Sidʹdim,
against Ched·or·la·oʹmer king of Eʹlam, Tiʹdal king of Goiʹim, Amʹra·phel king of Shiʹnar, and Arʹi·och king of El·laʹsar—four kings against the five.
Now the Valley of Sidʹdim was full of bitumen pits, and the kings of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah tried to escape and fell into them, and those who remained fled to the mountainous region.
Then the victors took all the goods of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and all their food and went on their way.
They also took Lot, the son of Aʹbram’s brother who was dwelling in Sodʹom, as well as his goods, and they continued on their way.
After that a man who had escaped came and told Aʹbram the Hebrew. He was then dwelling among the big trees of Mamʹre the Amʹor·ite, the brother of Eshʹcol and Aʹner. These men were allies of Aʹbram.
Thus Aʹbram heard that his relative had been taken captive. With that he mobilized his trained men,  servants born in his household, and went in pursuit up to Dan.
During the night, he divided his forces, and he and his servants attacked and defeated them. And he pursued them up to Hoʹbah, which is north of Damascus.
He recovered all the goods, and he also recovered Lot his relative, his goods, the women, and the other people.
After Aʹbram returned from defeating Ched·or·la·oʹmer and the kings who were with him, the king of Sodʹom went out to meet Aʹbram at the Valley of Shaʹveh, that is, the Valley of the King.
And Mel·chizʹe·dek king of Saʹlem brought out bread and wine; he was priest of the Most High God.
Then he blessed him and said:
And praised be the Most High God,
After that the king of Sodʹom said to Aʹbram: “Give me the people, but take the goods for yourself.”
But Aʹbram said to the king of Sodʹom: “I raise my hand in an oath to Jehovah the Most High God, Maker of heaven and earth,
that I will not take anything that is yours, from a thread to a sandal lace, so that you may not say, ‘I made Aʹbram rich.’
I will take nothing except what the young men have already eaten. As for the share of the men who went with me, Aʹner, Eshʹcol, and Mamʹre—let them take their share.”
After this the word of Jehovah came to Aʹbram in a vision, saying: “Do not fear, Aʹbram. I am a shield for you. Your reward will be very great.”
Aʹbram replied: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, what will you give me, seeing that I continue childless and the one who will inherit my house is a man of Damascus, E·li·eʹzer?”
Aʹbram added: “You have given me no offspring, and a member of my household is succeeding me as heir.”
But look! Jehovah’s word in reply to him was, “This man will not succeed you as heir, but your own son will succeed you as heir.”
He now brought him outside and said: “Look up, please, to the heavens and count the stars, if you are able to do so.” Then he said to him: “So your offspring will become.”
And he put faith in Jehovah, and He counted it to him as righteousness.
Then he added: “I am Jehovah, who brought you out of Ur of the Chal·deʹans to give you this land as your possession.”
To this he said: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, how will I know that I will take possession of it?”
He replied to him: “Take for me a three-year-old heifer, a three-year-old female goat, a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon.”
So he took all of these and cut them in two and put each part opposite the other, but he did not cut up the birds.
Then the birds of prey began to descend on the carcasses, but Aʹbram kept driving them away.
When the sun was about to set, a deep sleep fell upon Aʹbram and a great and frightening darkness descended on him.
Then He said to Aʹbram: “Know for certain that your offspring will be foreigners in a land not theirs and that the people there will enslave them and afflict them for  years.
But I will judge the nation they will serve, and after that they will go out with many goods.
As for you, you will go to your forefathers in peace; you will be buried at a good old age.
But they will return here in the fourth generation, because the error of the Amʹor·ites has not yet reached its full measure.”
When the sun had set and it had become very dark, a smoking furnace appeared, and a fiery torch passed between the pieces.
On that day Jehovah made with Aʹbram a covenant, saying: “To your offspring I will give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Eu·phraʹtes:
the land of the Kenʹites, the Kenʹiz·zites, the Kadʹmon·ites,
the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Rephʹa·im,
the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Girʹga·shites, and the Jebʹu·sites.”
Now Aʹbram’s wife Sarʹai had borne him no children, but she had an Egyptian servant whose name was Haʹgar.
So Sarʹai said to Aʹbram: “Please now! Jehovah has prevented me from bearing children. Please, have relations with my servant. Perhaps I can have children by means of her.” So Aʹbram listened to what Sarʹai said.
After Aʹbram had lived for ten years in the land of Caʹnaan, Aʹbram’s wife Sarʹai took her Egyptian servant Haʹgar and gave her to her husband Aʹbram as his wife.
So he had relations with Haʹgar, and she became pregnant. When she realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise her mistress.
At this Sarʹai said to Aʹbram: “The injury done to me is your fault. I was the one who put my servant in your arms, but when she realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise me. May Jehovah judge between me and you.”
So Aʹbram said to Sarʹai: “Look! Your servant is under your authority. Do to her whatever you think is best.” Then Sarʹai humiliated her, and she ran away from her.
Later Jehovah’s angel found her at a spring of waters in the wilderness, the spring on the way to Shur.
And he said: “Haʹgar, servant of Sarʹai, where have you come from and where are you going?” To this she said: “I am running away from my mistress Sarʹai.”
Jehovah’s angel then said to her: “Return to your mistress and humble yourself under her hand.”
Then Jehovah’s angel said: “I will greatly multiply your offspring, so that they will be too numerous to count.”
Jehovah’s angel added: “Here you are pregnant, and you will give birth to a son, and you must name him Ishʹma·el, for Jehovah has heard your affliction.
He will be a wild donkey of a man. His hand will be against everyone, and everyone’s hand will be against him, and he will dwell opposite all his brothers.”
Then she called on the name of Jehovah, who was speaking to her: “You are a God of sight,” for she said: “Have I here actually looked upon the one who sees me?”
That is why the well was called Beʹer-laʹhai-roi. (It is between Kaʹdesh and Beʹred.)
So Haʹgar bore to Aʹbram a son, and Aʹbram named his son, whom Haʹgar bore, Ishʹma·el.
Aʹbram was  years old when Haʹgar bore Ishʹma·el to him.
When Aʹbram was  years old, Jehovah appeared to Aʹbram and said to him: “I am God Almighty. Walk before me and prove yourself faultless.
I will establish my covenant between me and you, and I will multiply you very, very much.”
At this Aʹbram fell facedown, and God continued to speak with him, saying:
“As for me, look! my covenant is with you, and you will certainly become a father of many nations.
Your name will no longer be Aʹbram; your name will become Abraham, for I will make you a father of many nations.
I will make you very, very fruitful and will make you become nations, and kings will come from you.
“And I will keep my covenant between me and you and your offspring after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your offspring after you.
And I will give to you and to your offspring after you the land in which you lived as a foreigner—the entire land of Caʹnaan—for a lasting possession, and I will be their God.”
God said further to Abraham: “As for you, you are to keep my covenant, you and your offspring after you throughout their generations.
This is my covenant between me and you, that you and your offspring after you will keep: Every male among you must get circumcised.
You must circumcise the flesh of your foreskins, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and you.
Throughout your generations, every male among you eight days old must be circumcised, anyone who is born in the house and anyone who is not one of your offspring and who was purchased with money from a foreigner.
Every man born in your house and every man purchased with your money must be circumcised, and my covenant in your flesh must serve as a lasting covenant.
If any uncircumcised male will not circumcise the flesh of his foreskin, that person must be cut off from his people. He has broken my covenant.”
Then God said to Abraham: “As for your wife Sarʹai, you must not call her Sarʹai, because Sarah will become her name.
I will bless her and also give you a son by her; I will bless her and she will become nations; kings of peoples will come from her.”
At this Abraham fell facedown and began to laugh and to say in his heart: “Will a man  years old have a child born to him, and will Sarah, a woman  years old, give birth?”
So Abraham said to the true God: “O that Ishʹma·el might live before you!”
To this God said: “Your wife Sarah will definitely bear you a son, and you must name him Isaac. And I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant to his offspring after him.
But as regards Ishʹma·el, I have heard you. Look! I will bless him and will make him fruitful and will multiply him very, very much. He will produce  chieftains, and I will make him become a great nation.
However, I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this appointed time next year.”
When God finished speaking with him, he went up from Abraham.
Abraham then took Ishʹma·el his son and all the men born in his house and everyone he had purchased with money, every male in the household of Abraham, and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins on that very day, just as God had spoken with him.
Abraham was  years old when he had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised.
And Ishʹma·el his son was  years old when he had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised.
On that very day, Abraham was circumcised and also his son Ishʹma·el.
All the men of his household, anyone born in the house and anyone purchased with money from a foreigner, were also circumcised with him.
Afterward, Jehovah appeared to him among the big trees of Mamʹre while he was sitting at the entrance of the tent during the hottest part of the day.
He looked up and saw three men standing some distance from him. When he saw them, he ran from the entrance of the tent to meet them, and he bowed down to the ground.
Then he said: “Jehovah, if I have found favor in your eyes, please do not pass by your servant.
Please, let a little water be brought and have your feet washed; then recline under the tree.
Seeing that you have come here to your servant, let me bring a piece of bread so that you may refresh yourselves. Then you may go on your way.” At this they said: “All right. You may do as you have spoken.”
So Abraham hurried to the tent to Sarah and said: “Quick! Get three measures of fine flour, knead the dough, and make loaves of bread.”
Next Abraham ran to the herd and chose a tender and good young bull. He gave it to the attendant, who hurried to prepare it.
He then took butter and milk and the young bull that he had prepared and set the food before them. Then he stood by them under the tree as they were eating.
They said to him: “Where is your wife Sarah?” He replied: “Here in the tent.”
So one of them continued: “I will surely return to you next year at this time, and look! your wife Sarah will have a son.” Now Sarah was listening at the tent entrance, which was behind the man.
Abraham and Sarah were old, being advanced in years. Sarah was past the age of childbearing.
So Sarah began to laugh to herself, saying: “After I am worn out and my lord is old, will I really have this pleasure?”
Then Jehovah said to Abraham: “Why did Sarah laugh and say, ‘Am I really going to give birth even though I am old?’
Is anything too extraordinary for Jehovah? I will return to you next year at this appointed time, and Sarah will have a son.”
But Sarah denied it, saying, “I did not laugh!” for she was afraid. At this he said: “Yes! You did laugh.”
When the men got up to leave and looked down toward Sodʹom, Abraham was walking with them to escort them.
Jehovah said: “Am I keeping hidden from Abraham what I am going to do?
Why, Abraham is surely going to become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth will be blessed by means of him.
For I have come to know him in order that he may command his sons and his household after him to keep Jehovah’s way by doing what is right and just, so that Jehovah may bring about what he has promised concerning Abraham.”
Then Jehovah said: “The outcry against Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah is indeed great, and their sin is very heavy.
I will go down to see whether they are acting according to the outcry that has reached me. And if not, I can get to know it.”
Then the men left from there and went toward Sodʹom, but Jehovah remained with Abraham.
Then Abraham approached and said: “Will you really sweep away the righteous with the wicked?
Suppose there are  righteous men within the city. Will you, then, sweep them away and not pardon the place for the sake of the  righteous who are inside it?
It is unthinkable that you would act in this manner by putting the righteous man to death with the wicked one so that the outcome for the righteous man and the wicked is the same! It is unthinkable of you. Will the Judge of all the earth not do what is right?”
Then Jehovah said: “If I find in Sodʹom  righteous men in the city, I will pardon the whole place for their sake.”
But Abraham again responded: “Please, here I have presumed to speak to Jehovah, whereas I am dust and ashes.
Suppose the  righteous should lack five. Because of the five will you destroy the whole city?” To this he said: “I will not destroy it if I find there .”
But yet again he spoke to him and said: “Suppose  are found there.” He answered: “I will not do it for the sake of the .”
But he continued: “Jehovah, please, do not become hot with anger, but let me go on speaking: Suppose only  are found there.” He answered: “I will not do it if I find  there.”
But he continued: “Please, here I have presumed to speak to Jehovah: Suppose only  are found there.” He answered: “I will not destroy it for the sake of the .”
Finally he said: “Jehovah, please, do not become hot with anger, but let me speak just once more: Suppose only ten are found there.” He answered: “I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten.”
When Jehovah finished speaking to Abraham, he went his way and Abraham returned to his place.
The two angels arrived at Sodʹom by evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodʹom. When Lot saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the earth.
And he said: “Please, my lords, turn aside, please, into the house of your servant and stay overnight and have your feet washed. Then you may get up early and travel on your way.” To this they said: “No, we will stay overnight in the public square.”
But he was so insistent with them that they went with him to his house. Then he made a feast for them, and he baked unleavened bread, and they ate.
Before they could lie down to sleep, the men of the city—the men of Sodʹom from boy to old man, all of them—surrounded the house in one mob.
And they kept calling out to Lot and saying to him: “Where are the men who came in to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that we may have sex with them.”
Then Lot went out to them to the doorway, and he shut the door behind him.
He said: “Please, my brothers, do not act wickedly.
Please, here I have two daughters who have never had sexual relations with a man. Please, let me bring them out to you for you to do to them whatever seems good to you. But do not do anything to these men, for they have come under the shelter of my roof.”
At this they said: “Stand back!” And they added: “This lone foreigner came to live here, and yet he dares to judge us! Now we are going to do worse to you than to them.” And they crowded in on Lot and moved forward to break down the door.
So the men reached out their hands and brought Lot into the house with them, and they shut the door.
But they struck the men who were at the entrance of the house with blindness, from the least to the greatest, so that they wore themselves out trying to find the doorway.
Then the men said to Lot: “Do you have anyone else here? Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, and all your people in the city, bring out of this place!
For we are going to destroy this place, because the outcry against them has indeed grown great before Jehovah, so that Jehovah sent us to destroy the city.”
So Lot went out and began to speak to his sons-in-law who were to marry his daughters, and he kept saying: “Get up! Get out of this place, because Jehovah will destroy the city!” But to his sons-in-law, he seemed to be joking.
As dawn was breaking, the angels became urgent with Lot, saying: “Get up! Take your wife and your two daughters who are here with you, so that you will not be swept away in the error of the city!”
When he kept lingering, then because of Jehovah’s compassion for him, the men seized hold of his hand and the hand of his wife and the hands of his two daughters, and they brought him out and stationed him outside the city.
As soon as they had brought them to the outskirts, he said: “Escape for your life! Do not look behind you and do not stand still in any part of the district! Escape to the mountainous region so that you may not be swept away!”
Then Lot said to them: “Not there, please, Jehovah!
Please, now, your servant has found favor in your eyes and you are showing great kindness to me by preserving me alive, but I am not able to flee to the mountainous region because I am afraid that disaster may overtake me and I will die.
Please, now, this town is nearby and I can flee there; it is only a small place. May I, please, escape there? It is only a small place. Then I will survive.”
So he said to him: “Very well, I will also show you consideration by not overthrowing the town you speak of.
Hurry! Escape there, because I cannot do anything until you arrive there!” That is why he named the town Zoʹar.
The sun had risen over the land when Lot arrived at Zoʹar.
Then Jehovah made it rain sulfur and fire on Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah—it came from Jehovah, from the heavens.
So he overthrew these cities, yes, the entire district, including all the inhabitants of the cities and the plants of the ground.
But Lot’s wife, who was behind him, began to look back, and she became a pillar of salt.
Now Abraham got up early in the morning and went to the place where he had stood before Jehovah.
When he looked down toward Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and all the land of the district, he saw quite a sight. There was dense smoke rising from the land like the dense smoke of a kiln!
So when God destroyed the cities of the district, God kept Abraham in mind by sending Lot out from the cities he overthrew, the cities where Lot had been dwelling.
Later Lot went up from Zoʹar with his two daughters and began living in the mountainous region, because he was afraid to live in Zoʹar. So he began living in a cave with his two daughters.
And the firstborn said to the younger: “Our father is old, and there is not a man in the land to have relations with us according to the custom of the whole earth.
Come, let us give our father wine to drink, and let us lie down with him and preserve offspring from our father.”
So that night they kept giving their father wine to drink; then the firstborn went in and lay down with her father, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up.
Then on the next day, the firstborn said to the younger: “Here I lay down with my father last night. Let us give him wine to drink tonight also. Then you go in and lie down with him, and let us preserve offspring from our father.”
So that night also, they repeatedly gave their father wine to drink; then the younger went and lay down with him, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up.
So both daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father.
The firstborn gave birth to a son and named him Moʹab. He is the father of the Moʹab·ites of today.
The younger also gave birth to a son, and she named him Ben-amʹmi. He is the father of the Amʹmon·ites of today.
Now Abraham moved his camp from there to the land of the Negʹeb and began dwelling between Kaʹdesh and Shur. While he was residing at Geʹrar,
Abraham repeated concerning his wife Sarah: “She is my sister.” So A·bimʹe·lech king of Geʹrar sent for Sarah and took her.
Afterward, God came by night to A·bimʹe·lech in a dream and said to him: “Here you are as good as dead because of the woman whom you have taken, since she is married and belongs to another man.”
However, A·bimʹe·lech had not gone near her. So he said: “Jehovah, will you kill a nation that is really innocent?
Did he not say to me, ‘She is my sister,’ and did she too not say, ‘He is my brother’? I did this with an honest heart and innocent hands.”
Then the true God said to him in the dream: “I know that you did this with an honest heart, so I held you back from sinning against me. That is why I did not allow you to touch her.
Now return the man’s wife, for he is a prophet, and he will make supplication for you and you will keep living. But if you are not returning her, know that you will surely die, you and all who are yours.”
A·bimʹe·lech got up early in the morning and called all his servants and told them all these things, and they became very frightened.
Then A·bimʹe·lech called Abraham and said to him: “What have you done to us? What sin have I committed against you that you would bring upon me and my kingdom such a great sin? What you have done to me was not right.”
And A·bimʹe·lech went on to say to Abraham: “What were your intentions when you did this thing?”
Abraham said: “It was because I said to myself, ‘Surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they will kill me because of my wife.’
And besides, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife.
So when God caused me to wander from the house of my father, I said to her: ‘Let this be how you show loyal love to me: Everywhere we go, say of me, “He is my brother.”’”
A·bimʹe·lech then took sheep and cattle and male and female servants and gave them to Abraham, and he returned his wife Sarah to him.
A·bimʹe·lech also said: “Here my land is available to you. Dwell wherever you please.”
And to Sarah he said: “Here I give , pieces of silver to your brother. It is a sign of your innocence to all who are with you and before everybody, and you are cleared of reproach.”
And Abraham began to make supplication to the true God, and God healed A·bimʹe·lech and his wife and his slave girls, and they began having children;
for Jehovah had made all the women of the house of A·bimʹe·lech barren because of Sarah, Abraham’s wife.
Jehovah turned his attention to Sarah just as he had said, and Jehovah did for Sarah what he had promised.
So Sarah became pregnant and then bore a son to Abraham in his old age at the appointed time God had promised him.
Abraham named his newborn son, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac.
And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, just as God had commanded him.
Abraham was  years old when his son Isaac was born to him.
Then Sarah said: “God has brought me laughter; everybody hearing of it will laugh with me.”
And she added: “Who would have said to Abraham, ‘Sarah will certainly nurse children’? Yet, I have given birth to a son for him in his old age.”
Now the child grew and was weaned, and Abraham prepared a big feast on the day that Isaac was weaned.
But Sarah kept noticing that the son of Haʹgar the Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, was mocking Isaac.
So she said to Abraham: “Drive out this slave girl and her son, for the son of this slave girl is not going to be an heir along with my son, with Isaac!”
But what she said about his son was very displeasing to Abraham.
Then God said to Abraham: “Do not be displeased by what Sarah is saying to you about the boy and about your slave girl. Listen to her, for what will be called your offspring will be through Isaac.
As for the son of the slave girl, I will also make a nation out of him, because he is your offspring.”
So Abraham got up early in the morning and took bread and a skin bottle of water and gave it to Haʹgar. He set these on her shoulder and then sent her away along with the boy. So she departed and wandered about in the wilderness of Beʹer-sheʹba.
Finally the water in the skin bottle was used up, and she pushed the boy under one of the bushes.
Then she went on and sat down by herself, about the distance of a bowshot away, because she said: “I do not want to watch the boy die.” So she sat down at a distance and began to cry aloud and to weep.
At that God heard the voice of the boy, and God’s angel called to Haʹgar from the heavens and said to her: “What is the matter with you, Haʹgar? Do not be afraid, for God has heard the voice of the boy there where he is.
Get up, lift the boy and take hold of him with your hand, for I will make him a great nation.”
Then God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water, and she went and filled the skin bottle with water and gave the boy a drink.
And God was with the boy as he grew up. He lived in the wilderness and became an archer.
He took up dwelling in the wilderness of Paʹran, and his mother took a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
At that time A·bimʹe·lech together with Phiʹcol the chief of his army said to Abraham: “God is with you in everything you are doing.
So now swear to me here by God that you will not deal falsely with me and with my offspring and with my descendants, and that you will deal with me and with the land where you have been residing with the same loyal love that I have shown you.”
So Abraham said: “I swear to this.”
However, Abraham complained to A·bimʹe·lech about the well of water that the servants of A·bimʹe·lech had violently seized.
A·bimʹe·lech replied: “I do not know who did this; you did not tell me about it, and I heard nothing about it until today.”
At that Abraham took sheep and cattle and gave them to A·bimʹe·lech, and the two of them made a covenant.
When Abraham set seven female lambs apart from the flock by themselves,
A·bimʹe·lech said to Abraham: “Why have you set these seven female lambs here by themselves?”
Then he said: “You are to accept the seven female lambs from my hand as a witness that I dug this well.”
That is why he called that place Beʹer-sheʹba, because there both of them had taken an oath.
So they made a covenant at Beʹer-sheʹba, after which A·bimʹe·lech got up together with Phiʹcol the chief of his army, and they returned to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines.
After that he planted a tamarisk tree at Beʹer-sheʹba, and there he called on the name of Jehovah, the everlasting God.
And Abraham stayed in the land of the Phi·lisʹtines for a long time.
Now after this the true God put Abraham to the test, and he said to him: “Abraham!” to which he replied: “Here I am!”
Then he said: “Take, please, your son, your only son whom you so love, Isaac, and travel to the land of Mo·riʹah and offer him up there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains that I will designate to you.”
So Abraham got up early in the morning and saddled his donkey and took two of his servants along with him and his son Isaac. He split the wood for the burnt offering, and then he rose and traveled to the place that the true God indicated to him.
On the third day, Abraham looked up and saw the place from a distance.
Abraham now said to his servants: “You stay here with the donkey, but the boy and I will go over there and worship and return to you.”
So Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and put it on his son Isaac. Then he took in his hands the fire and the knife, and the two of them walked on together.
Then Isaac said to his father Abraham: “My father!” He replied: “Yes, my son!” So he continued: “Here are the fire and the wood, but where is the sheep for the burnt offering?”
To this Abraham said: “God himself will provide the sheep for the burnt offering, my son.” And both of them walked on together.
Finally they reached the place that the true God had indicated to him, and Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it. He bound his son Isaac hand and foot and put him on the altar on top of the wood.
Then Abraham reached out his hand and took the knife to kill his son.
But Jehovah’s angel called to him from the heavens and said: “Abraham, Abraham!” to which he answered: “Here I am!”
Then he said: “Do not harm the boy, and do not do anything at all to him, for now I do know that you are God-fearing because you have not withheld your son, your only one, from me.”
At that Abraham looked up, and there just beyond him was a ram caught by its horns in a thicket. So Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering in place of his son.
And Abraham named that place Je·hoʹvah-jiʹreh. This is why it is still said today: “In the mountain of Jehovah it will be provided.”
And Jehovah’s angel called to Abraham a second time from the heavens,
saying: “‘By myself I swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that because you have done this and you have not withheld your son, your only one,
I will surely bless you and I will surely multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens and like the grains of sand on the seashore, and your offspring will take possession of the gate of his enemies.
And by means of your offspring all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves because you have listened to my voice.’”
After that Abraham returned to his servants, and they got up and went back together to Beʹer-sheʹba; and Abraham continued to dwell at Beʹer-sheʹba.
After this it was reported to Abraham: “Here Milʹcah has also borne sons to Naʹhor your brother:
Uz his firstborn, Buz his brother, Kem·uʹel the father of Aʹram,
Cheʹsed, Haʹzo, Pilʹdash, Jidʹlaph, and Be·thuʹel.”
Be·thuʹel became the father of Re·bekʹah. Milʹcah bore these eight to Naʹhor the brother of Abraham.
His concubine, whose name was Reuʹmah, also bore sons: Teʹbah, Gaʹham, Taʹhash, and Maʹa·cah.
And Sarah lived for  years; these were the years of Sarah’s life.
So Sarah died in Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, in the land of Caʹnaan, and Abraham began to mourn and to weep over Sarah.
Then Abraham got up from before his dead wife and he said to the sons of Heth:
“I am a foreigner and settler among you. Give me a property to serve as a burial place in your midst so that I may remove my dead for burial.”
At this the sons of Heth answered Abraham:
“Hear us, my lord. You are a chieftain of God among us. You may bury your dead in the choicest of our burial places. None of us will hold back his burial place from you to prevent you from burying your dead.”
So Abraham got up and bowed down to the people of the land, to the sons of Heth,
and said to them: “If you agree to let me remove my dead for burial, then listen to me and urge Eʹphron the son of Zoʹhar
to sell me the cave of Mach·peʹlah, which belongs to him; it is at the edge of his field. Let him sell it to me in your presence for the full amount of silver so that I may have a property for a burial place.”
Now Eʹphron was sitting among the sons of Heth. So Eʹphron the Hitʹtite answered Abraham in the hearing of the sons of Heth, and before all who entered the gate of his city, saying:
“No, my lord! Listen to me. I give you both the field and the cave that is in it. In the presence of the sons of my people, I give it to you. Bury your dead.”
At that Abraham bowed down before the people of the land
and spoke to Eʹphron in the hearing of the people, saying: “Listen to me, if you will! I will give you the full amount of silver for the field. Take it from me, in order that I may bury my dead there.”
Then Eʹphron answered Abraham:
“My lord, listen to me. This land is worth  silver shekels, but what is that between me and you? So bury your dead.”
Abraham listened to Eʹphron, and Abraham weighed out to Eʹphron the amount of silver that he had mentioned in the hearing of the sons of Heth,  silver shekels according to the weight accepted by the merchants.
Thus the field of Eʹphron in Mach·peʹlah, which was in front of Mamʹre—the field and the cave in it and all the trees within the boundaries of the field—became confirmed as
Abraham’s purchased property in the presence of the sons of Heth, before all those entering the gate of his city.
After that Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave of the field of Mach·peʹlah in front of Mamʹre, that is, Hebʹron, in the land of Caʹnaan.
Thus the field and the cave that was in it were transferred by the sons of Heth to Abraham as property for a burial place.
Abraham was now old, advanced in years, and Jehovah had blessed Abraham in everything.
Abraham said to his servant, the oldest one of his household, who was managing all he had: “Please put your hand under my thigh,
and I will make you swear by Jehovah, the God of the heavens and the God of the earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Caʹnaan·ites, among whom I am dwelling.
You must go instead to my country and to my relatives and take a wife for my son, for Isaac.”
However, the servant said to him: “What if the woman is not willing to come with me to this land? Must I then return your son to the land from which you came?”
At this Abraham said to him: “See that you do not take my son there.
Jehovah the God of the heavens, who took me from my father’s house and from the land of my relatives and who spoke with me and swore to me: ‘To your offspring I am going to give this land,’ he will send his angel ahead of you, and you will certainly take a wife for my son from there.
But if the woman is unwilling to come with you, you will be free from this oath. But you must not take my son there.”
With that the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master and swore to him concerning this matter.
So the servant took ten of his master’s camels and departed, taking along all sorts of good things from his master. Then he went on his way to Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, to the city of Naʹhor.
He had the camels kneel down at a well of water outside the city. It was about evening, the time when the women would go out to draw water.
Then he said: “Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, please grant me success this day, and show your loyal love to my master Abraham.
Here I am standing at a spring of water, and the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water.
May it happen that the young woman to whom I say, ‘Please let down your water jar so that I may take a drink,’ and who replies, ‘Take a drink, and I will also water your camels,’ let this be the one you choose for your servant Isaac; and by this let me know that you have shown your loyal love to my master.”
Even before he finished speaking, Re·bekʹah, who was the daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Milʹcah the wife of Naʹhor, Abraham’s brother, came out with her water jar on her shoulder.
Now the young woman was very beautiful, a virgin; no man had had sexual relations with her. She went down to the spring, filled her water jar, and then came back up.
At once the servant ran to meet her and said: “Please give me a little sip of water from your jar.”
In turn she said: “Drink, my lord.” With that she quickly lowered her jar upon her hand and gave him a drink.
When she finished giving him a drink, she said: “I will also draw water for your camels until they are done drinking.”
So she quickly emptied her jar into the drinking trough and ran again and again to the well to draw water, and she kept drawing water for all his camels.
The whole time the man silently stared at her in amazement, wondering whether Jehovah had made his trip successful or not.
When the camels had finished drinking, the man took out for her a gold nose ring weighing a half shekel and two bracelets of gold weighing ten shekels,
and he said: “Please tell me, whose daughter are you? Is there any room at your father’s house for us to spend the night?”
At that she said to him: “I am the daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Milʹcah, whom she bore to Naʹhor.”
And she added: “We have both straw and much fodder and also a place to spend the night.”
Then the man bowed down and prostrated himself before Jehovah
and said: “May Jehovah be praised, the God of my master Abraham, for he has not abandoned his loyal love and his faithfulness toward my master. Jehovah has guided me to the house of the brothers of my master.”
And the young woman ran to tell her mother’s household about these things.
Now Re·bekʹah had a brother whose name was Laʹban. So Laʹban ran to the man who was outside at the spring.
When he saw the nose ring and the bracelets on the hands of his sister and heard the words of his sister Re·bekʹah, who was saying, “This is the way the man spoke to me,” he came to meet the man, who was still there standing by the camels at the spring.
At once he said: “Come, you who are blessed by Jehovah. Why do you keep standing out here? I have made the house ready and a place for the camels.”
With that the man came into the house, and he unharnessed the camels and gave straw and fodder to the camels and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.
However, when something to eat was set before him, he said: “I will not eat until I have told you what I have to say.” So Laʹban said: “Speak!”
Then he said: “I am Abraham’s servant.
And Jehovah has blessed my master very much, and he has made him very wealthy by giving him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, male and female servants, and camels and donkeys.
Further, Sarah the wife of my master bore a son to my master after she grew old, and he will give him everything he has.
So my master made me swear, saying: ‘You must not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Caʹnaan·ites, in whose land I am dwelling.
No, but you will go to the house of my father and to my family, and you must take a wife for my son.’
But I said to my master: ‘What if the woman is unwilling to come with me?’
He said to me: ‘Jehovah, before whom I have walked, will send his angel with you and will certainly give success to your journey, and you must take a wife for my son from my family and from the house of my father.
You will be released from your oath to me if you go to my family and they will not give her to you. This will release you from your oath.’
“When I got to the spring today, I said: ‘Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, if you will make my journey successful,
here I am standing at a spring. What must take place is that when a young woman comes out to draw water, I will say, “Please, let me drink a little water from your jar,”
and she will say to me, “You take a drink, and I will also draw water for your camels.” Let that woman be the one whom Jehovah has chosen for the son of my master.’
“Before I was finished speaking in my heart, there was Re·bekʹah coming out with her jar on her shoulder, and she made her way down to the spring and began to draw water. Then I said to her: ‘Give me a drink, please.’
So she quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder and said: ‘Take a drink, and I will also water your camels.’ Then I took a drink, and she also watered the camels.
After that I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ to which she replied, ‘The daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Naʹhor, whom Milʹcah bore to him.’ So I put the ring on her nose and the bracelets on her hands.
And I bowed down and prostrated myself before Jehovah and praised Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the right path to take the daughter of the brother of my master for his son.
And now tell me if you wish to show loyal love and faithfulness toward my master; but if not, tell me, so that I may proceed one way or the other.”
Then Laʹban and Be·thuʹel answered: “This is from Jehovah. We are not able to say yes or no to you.
Now Abraham again took a wife, and her name was Ke·tuʹrah.
In time she bore him Zimʹran, Jokʹshan, Meʹdan, Midʹi·an, Ishʹbak, and Shuʹah.
Jokʹshan became father to Sheʹba and Deʹdan.
The sons of Midʹi·an were Eʹphah, Eʹpher, Haʹnoch, A·biʹda, and El·daʹah.
Later on Abraham gave everything he had to Isaac,
but Abraham gave gifts to his sons by his concubines. Then while he was still alive, he sent them eastward, away from Isaac his son, to the land of the East.
The years of Abraham’s life were  years.
Then Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age, old and satisfied, and was gathered to his people.
His sons Isaac and Ishʹma·el buried him in the cave of Mach·peʹlah in the field of Eʹphron the son of Zoʹhar the Hitʹtite that is in front of Mamʹre,
the field that Abraham had purchased from the sons of Heth. There Abraham was buried, with his wife Sarah.
After Abraham’s death, God continued to bless his son Isaac, and Isaac was dwelling near Beʹer-laʹhai-roi.
This is the history of Ishʹma·el the son of Abraham whom Haʹgar the Egyptian, the servant of Sarah, bore to Abraham.
Now these are the names of the sons of Ishʹma·el, by their names according to their family origins: Ishʹma·el’s firstborn Ne·baʹioth, then Keʹdar, Adʹbe·el, Mibʹsam,
Mishʹma, Duʹmah, Masʹsa,
Haʹdad, Teʹma, Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Kedʹe·mah.
These are the sons of Ishʹma·el, and these are their names by their settlements and by their encampments,  chieftains according to their clans.
And Ishʹma·el lived for  years. Then he breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people.
And they took up dwelling from Havʹi·lah near Shur, which is close to Egypt, as far as As·syrʹi·a. He settled near all his brothers.
And this is the history of Isaac the son of Abraham.
Isaac was  years old when he married Re·bekʹah, the daughter of Be·thuʹel the A·ra·maeʹan of Padʹdan-aʹram, the sister of Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan.
And Isaac kept pleading with Jehovah regarding his wife, because she was barren; so Jehovah responded to his plea, and his wife Re·bekʹah became pregnant.
And the sons within her began to struggle with each other, so that she said: “If this is the way it is, why should I go on living?” So she inquired of Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to her: “Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples will be separated from within you; and the one nation will be stronger than the other nation, and the older will serve the younger.”
When the time came for her to give birth, look! twins were in her womb.
Then the first came out red all over and was like a garment of hair, so they named him Eʹsau.
After that his brother came out and his hand was holding onto the heel of Eʹsau, so he named him Jacob. Isaac was  years old when she gave birth to them.
As the boys got bigger, Eʹsau became a skilled hunter, a man of the field, but Jacob was a blameless man, dwelling in tents.
And Isaac loved Eʹsau because it meant game in his mouth, whereas Re·bekʹah loved Jacob.
On one occasion Jacob was boiling some stew when Eʹsau returned from the field exhausted.
So Eʹsau said to Jacob: “Quick, please, give me some of the red stew that you have there, for I am exhausted!” That is why his name was Eʹdom.
To this Jacob said: “First sell me your right as firstborn!”
And Eʹsau continued: “Here I am about to die! What use is a birthright to me?”
And Jacob added: “Swear to me first!” So he swore to him and sold his right as firstborn to Jacob.
Then Jacob gave Eʹsau bread and lentil stew, and he ate and drank, and he got up and went away. Thus Eʹsau despised the birthright.
Now there was a famine in the land, in addition to the first famine that occurred in the days of Abraham, so that Isaac went to A·bimʹe·lech king of the Phi·lisʹtines, in Geʹrar.
Then Jehovah appeared to him and said: “Do not go down to Egypt. Dwell in the land that I designate to you.
Reside as a foreigner in this land, and I will continue with you and bless you because to you and to your offspring I will give all these lands, and I will carry out the oath that I swore to your father Abraham:
‘I will multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens; and I will give to your offspring all these lands; and by means of your offspring, all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves,’
on account of the fact that Abraham listened to my voice and continued to keep my requirements, my commands, my statutes, and my laws.”
So Isaac continued to dwell in Geʹrar.
When the men of the place kept asking about his wife, he would say: “She is my sister.” He was afraid to say, “She is my wife,” for he said, “The men of the place might kill me because of Re·bekʹah,” for she was beautiful in appearance.
After some time had passed, A·bimʹe·lech king of the Phi·lisʹtines was looking out of the window, and he saw Isaac displaying affection for Re·bekʹah his wife.
At once A·bimʹe·lech called Isaac and said: “She is actually your wife! Why did you say, ‘She is my sister’?” At this Isaac said to him: “I said it for fear I should die because of her.”
But A·bimʹe·lech continued: “What have you done to us? One of the people could easily have lain down with your wife, and you would have brought guilt upon us!”
Then A·bimʹe·lech commanded all the people, saying: “Anybody touching this man and his wife will surely be put to death!”
And Isaac began to sow seed in that land, and in that year he reaped  times what he sowed, for Jehovah was blessing him.
The man became wealthy, and he continued to prosper until he became very wealthy.
He acquired flocks of sheep and herds of cattle and a large body of servants, and the Phi·lisʹtines began to envy him.
So the Phi·lisʹtines took soil and stopped up all the wells that his father’s servants had dug in the days of Abraham.
A·bimʹe·lech then said to Isaac: “Move from our neighborhood, for you have grown far stronger than we are.”
So Isaac moved from there and encamped in the valley of Geʹrar and began dwelling there.
And Isaac again dug the wells that had been dug in the days of his father Abraham but that the Phi·lisʹtines had stopped up after Abraham’s death, and he called them by the names that his father had given them.
When the servants of Isaac were digging in the valley, they found a well of fresh water.
And the shepherds of Geʹrar began quarreling with the shepherds of Isaac, saying: “The water is ours!” So he named the well Eʹsek, because they had quarreled with him.
And they started digging another well, and they began quarreling over it also. So he named it Sitʹnah.
Later he moved away from there and dug another well, but they did not quarrel over it. So he named it Re·hoʹboth and said: “It is because now Jehovah has given us ample room and has made us fruitful in the land.”
Then he went up from there to Beʹer-sheʹba.
That night Jehovah appeared to him and said: “I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not be afraid, for I am with you, and I will bless you and multiply your offspring on account of Abraham my servant.”
So he built an altar there and called on the name of Jehovah. And Isaac pitched his tent there, and his servants dug a well there.
Later A·bimʹe·lech came to him from Geʹrar with A·huzʹzath his personal adviser and Phiʹcol the chief of his army.
At this Isaac said to them: “Why have you come to me, seeing that you hated me and sent me away from your neighborhood?”
To this they said: “We have clearly seen that Jehovah has been with you. So we said, ‘Let there, please, be an oath of obligation between us and you, and let us make a covenant with you
that you will do nothing bad to us just as we have not harmed you, seeing that we have done only good to you in that we sent you away in peace. You now are the blessed of Jehovah.’”
Then he made a feast for them, and they ate and drank.
In the morning they got up early and swore an oath to each other. After that Isaac sent them away, and they went from him in peace.
On that day the servants of Isaac came and reported to him about the well that they had dug, and they told him: “We have found water!”
So he named it Shiʹbah. That is why the name of the city is Beʹer-sheʹba to this day.
When Eʹsau was  years old, he took as wife Juʹdith the daughter of Be·eʹri the Hitʹtite and also Basʹe·math the daughter of Eʹlon the Hitʹtite.
They were a source of great grief to Isaac and Re·bekʹah.
Now when Isaac was old and his eyes were too weak to see, he called Eʹsau his older son to him and said: “My son!” He replied: “Here I am!”
And he went on to say: “I have now grown old. I do not know the day of my death.
So at this time take, please, your weapons, your quiver and your bow, and go out to the field and hunt some wild game for me.
Then make the kind of tasty dish that I am fond of and bring it to me. Then I will eat it so that I may bless you before I die.”
However, Re·bekʹah was listening while Isaac spoke to Eʹsau his son. And Eʹsau went out into the field to hunt game and to bring it in.
And Re·bekʹah said to Jacob her son: “I just heard your father speaking to your brother Eʹsau, saying,
‘Bring me some game and make me a tasty dish. Then let me eat so that I may bless you before Jehovah before my death.’
And now, my son, listen carefully and do what I am instructing you.
Go, please, to the herd and get me two of the best young goats from there so that I may prepare from them a tasty dish for your father, just the way he likes it.
Then take it to your father to eat, in order that he may bless you before his death.”
Jacob said to his mother Re·bekʹah: “But Eʹsau my brother is a hairy man, and my skin is smooth.
What if my father feels me? Then I will certainly appear to be mocking him, and I will bring upon myself a curse rather than a blessing.”
At this his mother said to him: “Upon me be the curse meant for you, my son. Just do as I say and go, get them for me.”
So he went and got them and brought them to his mother, and his mother made a tasty dish, just the way his father liked it.
After that Re·bekʹah took her older son Eʹsau’s finest garments, which she had in the house, and put them on her younger son Jacob.
She also put the skins of the young goats on his hands and on the hairless part of his neck.
Then she handed the tasty dish and the bread that she had made to her son Jacob.
So he went in to his father and said: “My father!” to which he said: “Here I am! Who are you, my son?”
Jacob said to his father: “I am Eʹsau your firstborn. I have done just as you told me. Sit up, please, and eat some of my game, so that you may bless me.”
At that Isaac said to his son: “How were you so quick in finding it, my son?” He replied: “Because Jehovah your God brought it to me.”
Then Isaac said to Jacob: “Come near, please, that I may feel you, my son, to know whether you are really my son Eʹsau or not.”
So Jacob came near to his father Isaac, and he felt him, after which he said: “The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Eʹsau.”
He did not recognize him because his hands were hairy like the hands of his brother Eʹsau. So he blessed him.
After that he asked: “Are you really my son Eʹsau?” to which he replied: “I am.”
Then he said: “Bring me some of the wild game for me to eat, my son, then I will bless you.” With that he brought it to him and he ate, and he brought him wine and he drank.
Then Isaac his father said to him: “Come near, please, and kiss me, my son.”
So he came near and kissed him, and he could smell the scent of his garments. Then he blessed him and said:
May the true God give you the dews of the heavens and the fertile soils of the earth and an abundance of grain and new wine.
Let peoples serve you, and let nations bow low to you. Be master over your brothers, and let the sons of your mother bow low to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be everyone who blesses you.”
Now Isaac had just finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob had barely left the presence of his father Isaac when his brother Eʹsau came back from his hunting.
He too prepared a tasty dish and brought it to his father, and he said to his father: “Let my father get up and eat some of his son’s game, in order that you may bless me.”
At this his father Isaac said to him: “Who are you?” to which he said: “I am your son, your firstborn, Eʹsau.”
And Isaac began to tremble violently, so he said: “Who was it, then, who hunted for game and brought it to me? I already ate it before you arrived, and I blessed him—and he will surely be blessed!”
On hearing his father’s words, Eʹsau began to cry out in an extremely loud and bitter manner and to say to his father: “Bless me, yes, me too, my father!”
But he said: “Your brother came deceitfully so that he might get the blessing meant for you.”
At this he said: “Is he not rightly named Jacob, that he might supplant me these two times? My birthright he has already taken, and now he has taken my blessing!” Then he added: “Have you not reserved a blessing for me?”
But Isaac answered Eʹsau: “Here I have appointed him master over you, and I have given him all his brothers as servants, and I have bestowed grain and new wine for his support. What is left that I can do for you, my son?”
Eʹsau said to his father: “Is there just one blessing that you have, my father? Bless me, yes, me too, my father!” With that Eʹsau cried loudly and burst into tears.
So his father Isaac answered him:
And by your sword you will live, and you will serve your brother. But when you grow restless, you will indeed break his yoke off your neck.”
However, Eʹsau harbored animosity against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him, and Eʹsau kept saying in his heart: “The days of mourning for my father are getting closer. After that I am going to kill Jacob my brother.”
When the words of her older son Eʹsau were told to Re·bekʹah, she at once sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him: “Look! Your brother Eʹsau is planning to take revenge by killing you.
Now, my son, do as I say. Get up and run away to my brother Laʹban at Haʹran.
Dwell with him for a while until your brother’s rage calms down,
until your brother’s anger toward you subsides and he forgets what you have done to him. Then I will send for you from there. Why should I lose both of you in one day?”
After that Re·bekʹah kept saying to Isaac: “I am disgusted with my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob ever takes a wife from the daughters of Heth, like these daughters of the land, what good is my life?”
So Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and commanded him, saying: “You must not take a wife from the daughters of Caʹnaan.
Go away to Padʹdan-aʹram to the house of Be·thuʹel, your mother’s father, and from there take for yourself a wife from the daughters of Laʹban, your mother’s brother.
God Almighty will bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and you will certainly become a congregation of peoples.
And he will give to you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you, so that you may take possession of the land where you have been living as a foreigner, which God has given to Abraham.”
So Isaac sent Jacob away, and he departed for Padʹdan-aʹram, to Laʹban the son of Be·thuʹel the A·ra·maeʹan, the brother of Re·bekʹah, the mother of Jacob and Eʹsau.
Eʹsau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and had sent him away to Padʹdan-aʹram to take a wife from there and that when he blessed him, he commanded him, “Do not take a wife from the daughters of Caʹnaan,”
and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and departed for Padʹdan-aʹram.
Eʹsau then realized that the daughters of Caʹnaan were displeasing to his father Isaac,
so Eʹsau went to Ishʹma·el and took as wife Maʹha·lath the daughter of Abraham’s son Ishʹma·el, the sister of Ne·baʹioth, in addition to the other wives he already had.
Jacob departed from Beʹer-sheʹba and kept going toward Haʹran.
In time he came to a place and prepared to spend the night there because the sun had set. So he took one of the stones of that place and set it to rest his head on and lay down there.
Then he had a dream, and look! there was a stairway set on the earth, and its top reached up to the heavens; and there were God’s angels ascending and descending on it.
And look! there was Jehovah stationed above it, and he said:
And your offspring will certainly become like the dust particles of the earth, and you will spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south, and by means of you and by means of your offspring all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed.
I am with you, and I will safeguard you wherever you go, and I will return you to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.”
Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and said: “Truly Jehovah is in this place, and I did not know it.”
And he grew fearful and added: “How awe-inspiring this place is! This can only be the house of God, and this is the gate of the heavens.”
So Jacob got up early in the morning and took the stone on which he had rested his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it.
So he named that place Bethʹel, but previously the city’s name was Luz.
Jacob then made a vow, saying: “If God will continue with me and will protect me on my journey and will give me bread to eat and garments to wear
and I return in peace to the house of my father, then Jehovah will certainly have proved to be my God.
And this stone that I have set up as a pillar will become a house of God, and without fail I will give you a tenth of everything you give to me.”
After that Jacob resumed his journey and traveled on to the land of the people of the East.
Now he saw a well in the field and three droves of sheep lying down next to it, because they usually watered the droves from that well. There was a large stone over the mouth of the well.
When all the droves had been gathered there, they rolled away the stone from the mouth of the well, and they watered the flocks, after which they returned the stone to its place over the mouth of the well.
So Jacob said to them: “My brothers, what place are you from?” to which they said: “We are from Haʹran.”
He said to them: “Do you know Laʹban the grandson of Naʹhor?” to which they said: “We know him.”
At this he said to them: “Is he well?” They replied: “He is well. And here is his daughter Rachel coming with the sheep!”
Then he said: “It is still the middle of the day. It is not the time for gathering the herds. Water the sheep, and then go feed them.”
To this they said: “We are not allowed to do so until all the droves are gathered and they roll the stone away from the mouth of the well. Then we water the sheep.”
While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep, for she was a shepherdess.
When Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laʹban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of Laʹban, Jacob immediately approached and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered the sheep of Laʹban his mother’s brother.
Then Jacob kissed Rachel and raised his voice and burst into tears.
And Jacob began to tell Rachel that he was the relative of her father and that he was the son of Re·bekʹah. And she ran off and told her father.
As soon as Laʹban heard the report about Jacob the son of his sister, he ran to meet him. He embraced him and kissed him and brought him into his house. And he began to tell Laʹban all these things.
Laʹban said to him: “You are indeed my bone and my flesh.” So he stayed with him a full month.
Laʹban then said to Jacob: “Just because you are my relative, should you serve me for nothing? Tell me, what are your wages to be?”
Now Laʹban had two daughters. The name of the older was Leʹah, and the name of the younger, Rachel.
But the eyes of Leʹah had no luster, whereas Rachel had become a very attractive and beautiful woman.
Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel, so he said: “I am willing to serve you seven years for your younger daughter Rachel.”
To this Laʹban said: “It is better for me to give her to you than to give her to another man. Keep dwelling with me.”
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, but in his eyes they were like just a few days because of his love for her.
Then Jacob said to Laʹban: “Give over my wife because my days are up, and let me have relations with her.”
With that Laʹban gathered all the men of the place and made a feast.
But during the evening, he resorted to taking his daughter Leʹah and bringing her to him that he might have relations with her.
Laʹban also gave his female servant Zilʹpah to his daughter Leʹah as a servant.
In the morning Jacob saw that it was Leʹah! So he said to Laʹban: “What have you done to me? Was it not for Rachel that I served you? Why have you tricked me?”
To this Laʹban said: “It is not our custom here to give the younger woman before the firstborn.
Celebrate the week of this woman. After that you will also be given this other woman in exchange for serving me seven more years.”
Jacob did so and celebrated the week of this woman, after which he gave him his daughter Rachel as a wife.
Besides, Laʹban gave his female servant Bilʹhah to his daughter Rachel as her servant.
Then Jacob had relations also with Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than Leʹah, and he served him for another seven years.
When Jehovah saw that Leʹah was unloved, he then enabled her to become pregnant, but Rachel was barren.
So Leʹah became pregnant and gave birth to a son and named him Reuʹben, for she said: “It is because Jehovah has looked upon my affliction, for now my husband will begin to love me.”
And she again became pregnant and gave birth to a son and then said: “It is because Jehovah has listened, in that I was unloved, so he gave me this one also.” Then she named him Simʹe·on.
And she became pregnant yet again and gave birth to a son and then said: “Now this time my husband will join himself to me, because I have borne him three sons.” Therefore, he was named Leʹvi.
And she became pregnant once more and gave birth to a son and then said: “This time I will praise Jehovah.” She therefore named him Judah. After that she stopped giving birth.
When Rachel saw that she had borne no children to Jacob, she became jealous of her sister and began to say to Jacob: “Give me children or else I will die.”
At this Jacob’s anger flared up against Rachel, and he said: “Am I in the place of God, who has prevented you from having children?”
So she said: “Here is my slave girl Bilʹhah. Have relations with her in order that she may bear children for me and that through her, I too may have children.”
With that she gave him her servant Bilʹhah as a wife, and Jacob had relations with her.
Bilʹhah became pregnant and in time bore Jacob a son.
Then Rachel said: “God has acted as my judge and has also listened to my voice, so that he gave me a son.” That is why she named him Dan.
Bilʹhah, Rachel’s servant, became pregnant once more and in time bore Jacob a second son.
Then Rachel said: “With strenuous wrestlings I have wrestled with my sister. I have also come off the winner!” So she named him Naphʹta·li.
When Leʹah saw that she had stopped having children, she took her servant Zilʹpah and gave her to Jacob as a wife.
And Leʹah’s servant Zilʹpah bore a son to Jacob.
Then Leʹah said: “With good fortune!” So she named him Gad.
After that Zilʹpah, Leʹah’s servant, bore a second son to Jacob.
Then Leʹah said: “With my happiness! For the daughters will certainly pronounce me happy.” So she named him Ashʹer.
Now Reuʹben was walking in the days of the wheat harvest, and he found mandrakes in the field. So he brought them to his mother Leʹah. Then Rachel said to Leʹah: “Give me, please, some of your son’s mandrakes.”
At this she said to her: “Is it a small matter that you took my husband? Would you now take my son’s mandrakes also?” So Rachel said: “Very well. He will lie down with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes.”
When Jacob was coming from the field in the evening, Leʹah went out to meet him and said: “It is with me you are going to have relations, because I have hired you outright with my son’s mandrakes.” So he lay down with her that night.
And God heard and answered Leʹah, and she became pregnant and in time bore to Jacob a fifth son.
Then Leʹah said: “God has given me my wages because I have given my servant to my husband.” So she named him Isʹsa·char.
And Leʹah became pregnant once more and in time bore a sixth son to Jacob.
Then Leʹah said: “God has endowed me, yes, me, with a good endowment. At last, my husband will tolerate me, for I have borne him six sons.” So she named him Zebʹu·lun.
Afterward she bore a daughter and named her Diʹnah.
Finally God remembered Rachel, and God heard and answered her by enabling her to become pregnant.
And she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. Then she said: “God has taken away my reproach!”
So she named him Joseph, saying: “Jehovah is adding another son to me.”
After Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob immediately said to Laʹban: “Send me away so that I may go to my place and to my land.
Give over my wives and my children, for whom I have served with you, that I may go, for you well know how I have served you.”
Then Laʹban said to him: “If I have found favor in your eyes,—I have understood by the omens that Jehovah is blessing me because of you.”
And he added: “Stipulate your wages to me, and I will give them.”
So Jacob said to him: “You know how I have served you and how your herd has fared with me;
you had little before my coming, but your herd has increased and multiplied, and Jehovah has blessed you since I arrived. So when will I do something for my own house?”
Then he said: “What should I give you?” And Jacob said: “You will give me nothing whatsoever! If you will do this one thing for me, I will resume shepherding your flock and guarding it.
I will pass through your whole flock today. You set aside from there every sheep speckled and with color patches and every dark-brown sheep among the young rams and any color-patched and speckled one among the she-goats. From now on, these must become my wages.
And my righteousness must speak for me on a future day when you come to look over my wages; every one that is not speckled and color-patched among the she-goats and dark brown among the young rams will be considered stolen if it is with me.”
To this Laʹban said: “That is fine! Let it be according to your word.”
Then on that day, he set aside the he-goats striped and color-patched and all the she-goats speckled and color-patched, every one in which there was any white and every one dark brown among the young rams, and gave them into the care of his sons.
After that he set a distance of three days’ journey between himself and Jacob, and Jacob was shepherding the flocks of Laʹban that remained over.
Jacob then took freshly cut staffs of the storax, almond, and plane trees, and he peeled white spots in them by exposing the white wood of the staffs.
Then he placed the staffs that he had peeled in front of the flock, in the gutters, in the drinking troughs, where the flocks would come to drink, that they might get into heat in front of them when they came to drink.
So the flocks would get into heat in front of the staffs, and the flocks would produce striped, speckled, and color-patched offspring.
Then Jacob separated the young rams and turned the flocks to face the striped ones and all the dark-brown ones among the flocks of Laʹban. Then he separated his own flocks and did not mix them with Laʹban’s flocks.
And whenever the robust animals would get into heat, Jacob would place the staffs in the gutters before the eyes of the flocks, that they might get into heat by the staffs.
But when the animals were weak, he would not place the staffs there. So the weak ones always came to be Laʹban’s, but the robust ones became Jacob’s.
And the man grew very prosperous, and he acquired great flocks and male and female servants and camels and donkeys.
In time he heard what the sons of Laʹban were saying: “Jacob has taken everything that belonged to our father, and from what belonged to our father, he has amassed all this wealth.”
When Jacob would look at the face of Laʹban, he saw that his attitude toward him was not what it used to be.
Finally Jehovah said to Jacob: “Return to the land of your fathers and to your relatives, and I will continue with you.”
Then Jacob sent a message to Rachel and Leʹah to come out to the field to his flock,
and he said to them:
You yourselves certainly know that I have served your father with all my power.
And your father has tried to cheat me and has changed my wages ten times; but God has not allowed him to do me harm.
If on the one hand he would say, ‘The speckled ones will be your wages,’ then the whole flock produced speckled ones; but if on the other hand he would say, ‘The striped ones will be your wages,’ then the whole flock produced striped ones.
So God kept taking your father’s livestock away from him and giving it to me.
Once when the flock got into heat, I raised my eyes and saw in a dream that the he-goats mating with the flock were striped, speckled, and spotty.
Then the angel of the true God said to me in the dream, ‘Jacob!’ to which I said, ‘Here I am.’
And he continued, ‘Raise your eyes, please, and see that all the he-goats mating with the flock are striped, speckled, and spotty, for I have seen all that Laʹban is doing to you.
I am the true God of Bethʹel, where you anointed a pillar and where you made a vow to me. Now get up, go out of this land, and return to the land of your birth.’”
At this Rachel and Leʹah answered him: “Is there any share left for us to inherit in our father’s house?
Does he not consider us as foreigners, since he has sold us and has been using up the money given for us?
All the riches that God has taken away from our father are ours and our children’s. So, then, do everything that God has told you to do.”
Then Jacob got up and lifted his children and his wives on the camels,
and he began driving all his herd and all the goods that he had accumulated, the livestock in his possession that he had accumulated in Padʹdan-aʹram, to go to Isaac his father in the land of Caʹnaan.
Now Laʹban had gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole the teraphim statues that belonged to her father.
Moreover, Jacob outwitted Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan, for he had not told him that he was running away.
And he ran away and crossed the River, he and all he had. Then he headed toward the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad.
On the third day, Laʹban was told that Jacob had run away.
So he took his brothers with him and pursued him for a journey of seven days and caught up with him in the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad.
Then God came to Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan in a dream by night and said to him: “Be careful about what you say to Jacob, either good or bad.”
So Laʹban approached Jacob, as Jacob had pitched his tent in the mountain and Laʹban had encamped with his brothers in the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad.
Then Laʹban said to Jacob: “What have you done? Why have you resorted to outwitting me and carrying my daughters off like captives taken by the sword?
Why did you run away secretly and outwit me and not tell me? If you had told me, I could have sent you away with rejoicing and with songs, with tambourine and with harp.
But you did not give me a chance to kiss my grandchildren and my daughters. You have acted foolishly.
It is in my power to do harm to you, but the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, ‘Be careful about what you say to Jacob, either good or bad.’
Now you have gone because you have been longing to return to the house of your father, but why have you stolen my gods?”
Jacob answered Laʹban: “It was because I was afraid, for I said to myself, ‘You might take your daughters away from me by force.’
Anyone with whom you find your gods will not live. Before our brothers, examine what I have, and take what is yours.” But Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them.
So Laʹban went into the tent of Jacob and into the tent of Leʹah and into the tent of the two slave girls, but did not find them. Then he came out of Leʹah’s tent and went into Rachel’s tent.
Meanwhile, Rachel had taken the teraphim statues and put them in the woman’s saddle basket of the camel, and she was sitting on them. So Laʹban searched through the whole tent but did not find them.
Then she said to her father: “Do not be angry, my lord, because I am not able to get up before you, for the customary thing with women is upon me.” So he searched on carefully but did not find the teraphim statues.
At that Jacob became angry and began to criticize Laʹban. Jacob then said to Laʹban: “What is my offense, and for what sin are you hotly pursuing me?
Now that you have searched through all my goods, what have you found that belongs to your house? Put it here in front of my brothers and your brothers, and let them decide between the two of us.
During these  years that I have been with you, your sheep and your goats never miscarried, and I never ate the rams of your flock.
I did not bring you any animal torn by wild beasts. I would stand the loss of it myself. Whether the animal was stolen by day or was stolen by night, you would demand compensation from me.
By day the heat consumed me, and the cold by night, and sleep would flee from my eyes.
This makes  years for me in your house. I have served you  years for your two daughters and  years for your flock, and you kept changing my wages ten times.
If the God of my father, the God of Abraham and the One whom Isaac fears, had not been on my side, you would now have sent me away empty-handed. God has seen my affliction and the toil of my hands, and that is why he reproved you last night.”
Then Laʹban answered Jacob: “The daughters are my daughters and the children my children and the flock my flock, and everything you are looking at is mine and my daughters’. What can I do today against these or against their children whom they have borne?
Now come, let us make a covenant, you and I, and it will serve as a witness between us.”
So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar.
Then Jacob said to his brothers: “Pick up stones!” And they took stones and made a pile. After that they ate there on the pile of stones.
And Laʹban began calling it Jeʹgar-sa·ha·duʹtha, but Jacob called it Galʹe·ed.
Laʹban then said: “This pile of stones is a witness between me and you today.” That is why he named it Galʹe·ed,
and the Watchtower, for he said: “Let Jehovah keep watch between you and me when we are out of each other’s sight.
If you mistreat my daughters and if you start taking wives in addition to my daughters, though there is no man with us, remember that God will be a witness between you and me.”
Jacob then went on his way, and the angels of God met up with him.
As soon as he saw them, Jacob said: “This is the camp of God!” So he named that place Ma·ha·naʹim.
Then Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Eʹsau in the land of Seʹir, the territory of Eʹdom,
and he commanded them: “This is what you will say to my lord, to Eʹsau, ‘This is what your servant Jacob says: “I have resided with Laʹban for a long time until now.
And I have acquired bulls, donkeys, sheep, and male and female servants, and I send this message to inform my lord, in order to find favor in your eyes.”’”
In time the messengers returned to Jacob, saying: “We met your brother Eʹsau, and he is now on his way to meet you, and there are  men with him.”
And Jacob became very frightened and anxious. So he divided the people who were with him, as well as the flocks, the cattle, and the camels, into two camps.
He said: “If Eʹsau attacks the one camp, then the other camp will be able to escape.”
After that Jacob said: “O God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, O Jehovah, you who are saying to me, ‘Return to your land and to your relatives, and I will deal well with you,’
I am unworthy of all the loyal love and of all the faithfulness that you have shown toward your servant, for with only my staff I crossed this Jordan and now I have become two camps.
Save me, I pray you, from the hand of my brother Eʹsau, for I am afraid of him that he may come and attack me, as well as the mothers and their children.
And you have said: ‘I will certainly deal well with you, and I will make your offspring like the grains of sand of the sea, which are too numerous to count.’”
And he spent the night there. Then he took some of his possessions as a gift for Eʹsau his brother:
female goats,  male goats,  female sheep,  rams,
camels nursing their young,  cows,  bulls,  female donkeys and  full-grown male donkeys.
He handed them over to his servants, one drove after another, and he said to his servants: “Cross over ahead of me, and you are to set a space between one drove and the next.”
He also commanded the first one: “In case Eʹsau my brother should meet you and ask, ‘To whom do you belong, and where are you going, and to whom do these ahead of you belong?’
then you should say, ‘To your servant Jacob. It is a gift sent to my lord, to Eʹsau, and look! he himself is also behind us.’”
And he commanded also the second, the third, and all those following the droves: “According to this word, you are to speak to Eʹsau when you meet him.
And you should also say, ‘Here is your servant Jacob behind us.’” For he said to himself: ‘If I appease him by sending a gift ahead of me, then afterward when I see him, he may give me a kindly reception.’
So the gift crossed over ahead of him, but he himself spent the night in the camp.
Later during that night, he rose and took his two wives and his two female servants and his  young sons and crossed over the ford of Jabʹbok.
So he took them and brought them across the stream, and he brought over everything else he had.
Finally Jacob was left by himself. Then a man began to wrestle with him until the dawn broke.
When he saw that he had not prevailed over him, he touched the socket of his hip; and the socket of Jacob’s hip was dislocated during his wrestling with him.
After that he said: “Let me go, for the dawn is breaking.” To this he said: “I am not going to let you go until you bless me.”
So he said to him: “What is your name?” to which he said: “Jacob.”
Then he said: “Your name will no longer be Jacob but Israel, for you have contended with God and with men and you have at last prevailed.”
In turn Jacob inquired: “Tell me, please, your name.” However, he said: “Why is it that you ask my name?” With that he blessed him there.
So Jacob named the place Pe·niʹel, for he said, “I have seen God face-to-face, yet my life was preserved.”
And the sun rose upon him as soon as he passed by Pe·nuʹel, but he was limping because of his hip.
That is why to this day the sons of Israel are not accustomed to eat the thigh sinew, which is on the socket of the hip joint, because he touched the socket of Jacob’s hip joint by the thigh sinew.
Now Jacob raised his eyes and saw Eʹsau coming, and  men were with him. So he divided the children among Leʹah, Rachel, and the two female servants.
He put the female servants and their children in front, Leʹah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph behind them.
Then he himself went ahead of them and bowed down to the earth seven times as he came near to his brother.
But Eʹsau ran to meet him, and he embraced him and kissed him, and they burst into tears.
When he raised his eyes and saw the women and the children, he said: “Who are these with you?” to which he said: “The children with whom God has favored your servant.”
At that the female servants came forward with their children and bowed down,
and Leʹah too came forward with her children, and they bowed down. Then Joseph came forward with Rachel, and they bowed down.
Eʹsau said: “What is the purpose of all this camp of travelers that I have met?” He replied: “In order to find favor in the eyes of my lord.”
Then Eʹsau said: “I have a great many possessions, my brother. Keep what is yours.”
However, Jacob said: “No, please. If I have found favor in your eyes, you must take my gift from my hand, because I brought it so that I could see your face. And I have seen your face as though seeing God’s face, in that you received me with pleasure.
Take, please, the gift conveying my blessing that was brought to you, for God has favored me and I have everything I need.” And he continued to urge him, so that he took it.
Later Eʹsau said: “Let us move out and go, and let me go in advance of you.”
But he said to him: “My lord is aware that the children are delicate and that in my care are sheep and cattle nursing their young. If they are driven too quickly for one day, then the whole flock will die.
Let my lord, please, go on ahead of his servant, but I will continue the journey more slowly at the pace of my livestock and of the children until I come to my lord at Seʹir.”
Then Eʹsau said: “Please, let me leave some of my people with you.” To this he said: “Why do this? Just let me find favor in the eyes of my lord.”
So that day Eʹsau went on his way back to Seʹir.
And Jacob journeyed to Sucʹcoth, and he built a house for himself and he made shelters for his herd. That was why he named the place Sucʹcoth.
After journeying from Padʹdan-aʹram, Jacob arrived safely at the city of Sheʹchem in the land of Caʹnaan, and he set up his camp near the city.
Then he acquired a portion of the field where he pitched his tent from the sons of Haʹmor, the father of Sheʹchem, for  pieces of money.
There he set up an altar and called it God, the God of Israel.
Now Diʹnah, Jacob’s daughter by Leʹah, used to go out to spend time with the young women of the land.
When Sheʹchem, the son of Haʹmor the Hiʹvite, a chieftain of the land, saw her, he took her and lay down with her and violated her.
And he became very attached to Diʹnah, the daughter of Jacob, and he fell in love with the young woman and spoke persuasively to her.
Finally Sheʹchem said to Haʹmor his father: “Get me this young woman to be my wife.”
When Jacob heard that he had defiled Diʹnah his daughter, his sons were with his herd in the field. So Jacob kept silent until they returned.
Later Haʹmor, Sheʹchem’s father, went out to speak with Jacob.
But the sons of Jacob heard about it and returned from the field right away. They were offended and very angry because he had disgraced Israel by lying down with Jacob’s daughter, something that should not be done.
Haʹmor spoke with them, saying: “My son Sheʹchem longs for your daughter. Please give her to him as his wife,
and form marriage alliances with us. Give us your daughters, and take our daughters for yourselves.
You may dwell with us, and the land will become available for you. Dwell and carry on trade in it and settle in it.”
Then Sheʹchem said to her father and to her brothers: “Let me find favor in your eyes, and I will give you whatever you ask me.
You can demand from me a very high bride price and gift. I am willing to give whatever you may say to me. Just give me the young woman as a wife.”
And Jacob’s sons answered Sheʹchem and Haʹmor his father deceitfully because he had defiled Diʹnah their sister.
They said to them: “We cannot possibly do such a thing, to give our sister to a man who is not circumcised, for that is a disgrace to us.
We can only consent on this condition: that you become like us and circumcise all your males.
Then we will give our daughters to you, and we will take your daughters for ourselves, and we will dwell with you and become one people.
But if you do not listen to us and get circumcised, then we will take our daughter and go.”
Their words pleased Haʹmor and Sheʹchem, Haʹmor’s son.
The young man did not delay in doing what they asked, because he found delight in Jacob’s daughter, and he was the most honorable of the whole house of his father.
So Haʹmor and his son Sheʹchem went to the city gate and spoke to the men of their city, saying:
“These men wish to be at peace with us. Let them dwell in the land and carry on trade in it, for the land is large enough to accommodate them. We can take their daughters as wives, and our daughters we can give to them.
Only on this one condition will the men consent to dwell with us in order to become one people: that every male among us be circumcised just the way they are circumcised.
Then, will not their possessions, their wealth, and all their livestock be ours? So let us give them our consent that they may dwell with us.”
All those going out by the gate of his city listened to Haʹmor and to his son Sheʹchem, and all the males got circumcised, all those going out of the city gate.
However, on the third day, when they were still in pain, two sons of Jacob, Simʹe·on and Leʹvi, Diʹnah’s brothers, each took his sword and went into the unsuspecting city and killed every male.
They killed Haʹmor and his son Sheʹchem with the sword and then took Diʹnah from Sheʹchem’s house and left.
Jacob’s other sons came upon the slain men and plundered the city because they had defiled their sister.
They took their flocks, their herds, their donkeys, and whatever was in the city and in the field.
They also took all their possessions, captured all their little children and their wives, and plundered everything in the houses.
At this Jacob said to Simʹe·on and to Leʹvi: “You have brought great trouble on me in making me a stench to the inhabitants of the land, to the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites. I am few in number, and they will certainly gather together to attack me and I will be annihilated, I and my house.”
But they said: “Should anyone treat our sister like a prostitute?”
After that God said to Jacob: “Rise, go up to Bethʹel and dwell there, and make an altar there to the true God, who appeared to you when you were running away from Eʹsau your brother.”
Then Jacob said to his household and to all who were with him: “Get rid of the foreign gods that are in your midst, and cleanse yourselves and change your garments,
and let us rise and go up to Bethʹel. There I will make an altar to the true God, who answered me in the day of my distress and who has been with me wherever I have gone.”
So they gave Jacob all the foreign gods they had and the earrings that were in their ears, and Jacob buried them under the big tree that was close to Sheʹchem.
When they traveled on, the terror of God struck the cities around them, so they did not chase after the sons of Jacob.
Jacob eventually came to Luz, that is, Bethʹel, in the land of Caʹnaan, he and all the people with him.
There he built an altar and called the place El-bethʹel, because there the true God had revealed himself to him when he had run away from his brother.
Later Debʹo·rah, Re·bekʹah’s nurse, died and was buried at the foot of Bethʹel under an oak. So he named it Alʹlon-bacʹuth.
God appeared to Jacob once again while he was coming from Padʹdan-aʹram and blessed him.
God said to him: “Your name is Jacob. Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel will be your name.” And he began to call him Israel.
God further said to him: “I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and become many. Nations and a congregation of nations will come from you, and kings will descend from you.
As for the land that I have given to Abraham and to Isaac, to you I will give it, and to your offspring after you I will give the land.”
Then God went up from him at the place where he had spoken with him.
So Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he had spoken with him, a pillar of stone, and he poured a drink offering on it and poured oil on it.
And Jacob continued to call the place where God had spoken with him Bethʹel.
Then they pulled away from Bethʹel. And while they were still some distance from Ephʹrath, Rachel began to give birth, and her labor was very difficult.
But while she was struggling to deliver the child, the midwife said to her: “Do not be afraid, for you will have this son also.”
Just as her life was slipping away (for she was dying), she named him Ben-oʹni, but his father called him Benjamin.
So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephʹrath, that is, Bethʹle·hem.
Jacob set up a pillar over her grave; it is the pillar of Rachel’s grave to this day.
After that Israel pulled away and pitched his tent a distance beyond the tower of Eʹder.
Once while Israel was dwelling in that land, Reuʹben went and lay down with Bilʹhah his father’s concubine, and Israel heard about it.
The sons by Leʹah were Jacob’s firstborn Reuʹben, then Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, Judah, Isʹsa·char, and Zebʹu·lun.
The sons by Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin.
And the sons by Bilʹhah, Rachel’s servant, were Dan and Naphʹta·li.
And the sons by Zilʹpah, Leʹah’s servant, were Gad and Ashʹer. These are Jacob’s sons, who were born to him in Padʹdan-aʹram.
Jacob eventually came to where his father Isaac was at Mamʹre, to Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, where Abraham and also Isaac had resided as foreigners.
Isaac lived to be  years old.
Then Isaac breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people, after a long and satisfying life; and his sons Eʹsau and Jacob buried him.
This is the history of Eʹsau, that is, Eʹdom.
Eʹsau took his wives from the daughters of Caʹnaan: Aʹdah the daughter of Eʹlon the Hitʹtite; and O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, the granddaughter of Zibʹe·on the Hiʹvite;
and Basʹe·math, Ishʹma·el’s daughter, the sister of Ne·baʹioth.
And Aʹdah bore Elʹi·phaz to Eʹsau, and Basʹe·math bore Reuʹel,
and O·hol·i·baʹmah bore Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.
After that Eʹsau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, all the members of his household, his herd and all his other beasts, and all the wealth he had accumulated in the land of Caʹnaan and he went to another land some distance away from Jacob his brother.
For their goods had become too many for them to dwell together, and the land where they were residing was not able to sustain them because of their herds.
So Eʹsau took up dwelling in the mountainous region of Seʹir. Eʹsau is Eʹdom.
And this is the history of Eʹsau the father of Eʹdom in the mountainous region of Seʹir.
These are the names of the sons of Eʹsau: Elʹi·phaz the son of Aʹdah, Eʹsau’s wife; Reuʹel the son of Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
The sons of Elʹi·phaz were Teʹman, Oʹmar, Zeʹpho, Gaʹtam, and Keʹnaz.
Timʹna became the concubine of Elʹi·phaz, Eʹsau’s son. In time she bore to Elʹi·phaz, Amʹa·lek. These are the sons of Aʹdah, Eʹsau’s wife.
These are the sons of Reuʹel: Naʹhath, Zeʹrah, Shamʹmah, and Mizʹzah. These were the sons of Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
These were the sons of O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, the granddaughter of Zibʹe·on, Eʹsau’s wife, whom she bore to Eʹsau: Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.
These are the sheikhs of the sons of Eʹsau: The sons of Elʹi·phaz, Eʹsau’s firstborn: Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Oʹmar, Sheikh Zeʹpho, Sheikh Keʹnaz,
Sheikh Korʹah, Sheikh Gaʹtam, and Sheikh Amʹa·lek. These are the sheikhs of Elʹi·phaz in the land of Eʹdom. These are the sons by Aʹdah.
These are the sons of Reuʹel, Eʹsau’s son: Sheikh Naʹhath, Sheikh Zeʹrah, Sheikh Shamʹmah, and Sheikh Mizʹzah. These are the sheikhs of Reuʹel in the land of Eʹdom. These are the sons by Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
Finally these are the sons of O·hol·i·baʹmah, Eʹsau’s wife: Sheikh Jeʹush, Sheikh Jaʹlam, and Sheikh Korʹah. These are the sheikhs of O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, Eʹsau’s wife.
These are the sons of Eʹsau, and these are their sheikhs. He is Eʹdom.
These are the sons of Seʹir the Horʹite, the inhabitants of the land: Loʹtan, Shoʹbal, Zibʹe·on, Aʹnah,
Diʹshon, Eʹzer, and Diʹshan. These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites, the sons of Seʹir, in the land of Eʹdom.
The sons of Loʹtan were Hoʹri and Heʹmam, and Loʹtan’s sister was Timʹna.
These are the sons of Shoʹbal: Alʹvan, Manʹa·hath, Eʹbal, Sheʹpho, and Oʹnam.
These are the sons of Zibʹe·on: Aʹiah and Aʹnah. This is the Aʹnah who found the hot springs in the wilderness while he was tending the donkeys for Zibʹe·on his father.
These are the children of Aʹnah: Diʹshon and O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah.
These are the sons of Diʹshon: Hemʹdan, Eshʹban, Ithʹran, and Cheʹran.
These are the sons of Eʹzer: Bilʹhan, Zaʹa·van, and Aʹkan.
These are the sons of Diʹshan: Uz and Aʹran.
These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites: Sheikh Loʹtan, Sheikh Shoʹbal, Sheikh Zibʹe·on, Sheikh Aʹnah,
Sheikh Diʹshon, Sheikh Eʹzer, and Sheikh Diʹshan. These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites according to their sheikhs in the land of Seʹir.
Now these are the kings who reigned in the land of Eʹdom before any king reigned over the Israelites.
Beʹla son of Beʹor reigned in Eʹdom, and the name of his city was Dinʹha·bah.
When Beʹla died, Joʹbab son of Zeʹrah from Bozʹrah began to reign in his place.
When Joʹbab died, Huʹsham from the land of the Teʹman·ites began to reign in his place.
When Huʹsham died, Haʹdad son of Beʹdad, who defeated the Midʹi·an·ites in the territory of Moʹab, began to reign in his place, and the name of his city was Aʹvith.
When Haʹdad died, Samʹlah from Mas·reʹkah began to reign in his place.
When Samʹlah died, Shaʹul from Re·hoʹboth by the River began to reign in his place.
When Shaʹul died, Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor began to reign in his place.
When Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor died, Haʹdar began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Paʹu, and the name of his wife was Me·hetʹa·bel the daughter of Maʹtred the daughter of Meʹza·hab.
So these are the names of the sheikhs of Eʹsau according to their families, according to their places, by their names: Sheikh Timʹna, Sheikh Alʹvah, Sheikh Jeʹtheth,
Sheikh O·hol·i·baʹmah, Sheikh Eʹlah, Sheikh Piʹnon,
Sheikh Keʹnaz, Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Mibʹzar,
Sheikh Magʹdi·el, and Sheikh Iʹram. These are the sheikhs of Eʹdom according to their settlements in the land of their possession. This is Eʹsau the father of Eʹdom.
Jacob continued to dwell in the land of Caʹnaan, where his father had lived as a foreigner.
This is the history of Jacob.
Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his other sons because he was the son of his old age, and he had a special robe made for him.
When his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers, they began to hate him, and they could not speak peaceably to him.
Later Joseph had a dream and told it to his brothers, and they found further reason to hate him.
He said to them: “Please listen to this dream that I had.
There we were binding sheaves in the middle of the field when my sheaf got up and stood erect and your sheaves encircled and bowed down to my sheaf.”
His brothers said to him: “Are you really going to make yourself king over us and dominate us?” So they found another reason to hate him, because of his dreams and what he said.
After that he had still another dream, and he related it to his brothers: “I have had another dream. This time the sun and the moon and  stars were bowing down to me.”
Then he related it to his father as well as his brothers, and his father rebuked him and said to him: “What is the meaning of this dream of yours? Am I as well as your mother and your brothers really going to come and bow down to the earth to you?”
And his brothers grew jealous of him, but his father kept the saying in mind.
His brothers now went to pasture their father’s flock near Sheʹchem.
Israel later said to Joseph: “Your brothers are tending flocks near Sheʹchem, are they not? Come, and let me send you to them.” At this he said to him: “I am ready!”
So he said to him: “Go, please, and see whether your brothers are well. See how the flock is, and bring word back to me.” With that he sent him away from the valley of Hebʹron, and he went on toward Sheʹchem.
Later a man found him as he was wandering in a field. The man asked him: “What are you looking for?”
To this he said: “I am looking for my brothers. Please tell me, where are they tending flocks?”
The man continued: “They have pulled away from here, for I heard them saying, ‘Let us go to Doʹthan.’” So Joseph went after his brothers and found them at Doʹthan.
Now they caught sight of him from a distance, and before he reached them, they began plotting against him to put him to death.
So they said to one another: “Look! Here comes that dreamer.
Come, now, let us kill him and pitch him into one of the waterpits, and we will say that a vicious wild animal devoured him. Then let us see what will become of his dreams.”
When Reuʹben heard this, he tried to rescue him from them. So he said: “Let us not take his life.”
Reuʹben said to them: “Do not shed blood. Throw him into this waterpit in the wilderness, but do not harm him.” His purpose was to rescue him from them in order to return him to his father.
So as soon as Joseph came to his brothers, they stripped Joseph of his robe, the special robe that he wore,
and they took him and threw him into the waterpit. At the time the pit was empty; there was no water in it.
Then they sat down to eat. When they looked up, there was a caravan of Ishʹma·el·ites coming from Gilʹe·ad. Their camels were carrying labdanum gum, balsam, and resinous bark, and they were on their way down to Egypt.
At this Judah said to his brothers: “What profit would there be if we killed our brother and covered over his blood?
Come, now, let us sell him to the Ishʹma·el·ites, and do not let our hand be upon him. After all, he is our brother, our flesh.” So they listened to their brother.
And when the Midʹi·an·ite merchants were passing by, they lifted Joseph up out of the waterpit and sold him to the Ishʹma·el·ites for  pieces of silver. These men took Joseph into Egypt.
Later when Reuʹben returned to the waterpit and saw that Joseph was not in the waterpit, he ripped his garments apart.
When he returned to his brothers, he exclaimed: “The child is gone! And I—what am I going to do?”
So they took Joseph’s robe and slaughtered a male goat and dipped the robe in the blood.
After that they sent the special robe to their father and said: “This is what we found. Please examine whether this is your son’s robe or not.”
Then he examined it and exclaimed: “It is my son’s robe! A vicious wild animal must have devoured him! Joseph is surely torn to pieces!”
With that Jacob ripped his garments apart and put sackcloth around his waist and mourned his son for many days.
And all his sons and all his daughters kept trying to comfort him, but he kept refusing to take comfort, saying: “I will go down into the Grave mourning my son!” And his father continued weeping for him.
Now the Midʹi·an·ites sold him in Egypt to Potʹi·phar, a court official of Pharʹaoh and the chief of the guard.
About that time Judah left his brothers and pitched his tent near an A·dulʹlam·ite man named Hiʹrah.
There Judah saw the daughter of a certain Caʹnaan·ite named Shuʹa. So he took her and had relations with her,
and she became pregnant. Later she bore a son, and he named him Er.
Again she became pregnant and bore a son and named him Oʹnan.
Yet again she bore a son and named him Sheʹlah. He was in Achʹzib when she bore him.
In time Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, and her name was Taʹmar.
But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was displeasing to Jehovah; so Jehovah put him to death.
In view of that, Judah said to Oʹnan: “Have relations with your brother’s wife and perform brother-in-law marriage with her and raise up offspring for your brother.”
But Oʹnan knew that the offspring would not be considered his. So when he did have relations with his brother’s wife, he wasted his semen on the ground so as not to give offspring to his brother.
What he did was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, so he also put him to death.
Judah said to Taʹmar his daughter-in-law: “Dwell as a widow in the house of your father until my son Sheʹlah grows up,” for he said to himself: ‘He too may die like his brothers.’ So Taʹmar went and stayed in her own father’s house.
Some time passed, and Judah’s wife, the daughter of Shuʹa, died. Judah kept the mourning period, and then he went to his sheepshearers in Timʹnah with his companion Hiʹrah the A·dulʹlam·ite.
Taʹmar was told: “Here your father-in-law is going up to Timʹnah to shear his sheep.”
With that she removed her widow’s clothing and veiled herself and covered herself with a shawl and sat down at the entrance of E·naʹim, which is on the road to Timʹnah, for she saw that Sheʹlah had grown up and yet she had not been given to him as a wife.
When Judah caught sight of her, he at once took her for a prostitute, because she had covered her face.
So he turned aside to her by the road and said: “Allow me, please, to have relations with you,” for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. However, she said: “What will you give me that you may have relations with me?”
To this he said: “I will send a young goat from my herd.” But she said: “Will you give a security until you send it?”
He continued: “What security should I give you?” to which she said: “Your seal ring and your cord and your rod that is in your hand.” Then he gave them to her and had relations with her, and she became pregnant by him.
After that she got up and went away and removed her shawl and clothed herself with her widow’s clothing.
And Judah sent the young goat by the hand of his companion the A·dulʹlam·ite, to get back the security from the hand of the woman, but he never found her.
He inquired of the men of her place, saying: “Where is that temple prostitute in E·naʹim along the road?” But they said: “No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.”
Finally he returned to Judah and said: “I never found her, and besides, the men of the place said, ‘No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.’”
So Judah said: “Let her take them for herself, in order that we may not fall into contempt. At any rate, I have sent this young goat, but you never found her.”
However, about three months later, Judah was told: “Taʹmar your daughter-in-law has acted as a prostitute, and she is also pregnant by her prostitution.” At that Judah said: “Bring her out and let her be burned.”
As she was being brought out, she sent word to her father-in-law: “I am pregnant by the man to whom these belong.” Then she added: “Please examine to whom these belong, the seal ring and the cord and the rod.”
Then Judah examined them and said: “She is more righteous than I am, because I did not give her to Sheʹlah my son.” And he had no further sexual relations with her after that.
When the time came for her to give birth, there were twins in her womb.
As she was giving birth, one put out his hand, and the midwife immediately took a scarlet thread and tied it around his hand, saying: “This one came out first.”
But as soon as he drew back his hand, his brother came out, and she exclaimed: “What a breach you have made for yourself!” So he was named Peʹrez.
Afterward his brother came out, around whose hand the scarlet thread was tied, and he was named Zeʹrah.
Now Joseph was taken down to Egypt, and an Egyptian named Potʹi·phar, a court official of Pharʹaoh and chief of the guard, bought him from the Ishʹma·el·ites who had taken him down there.
But Jehovah was with Joseph. As a result, he became successful and was put over the house of his master, the Egyptian.
And his master saw that Jehovah was with him and that Jehovah was making everything that he did successful.
Joseph kept finding favor in his eyes, and he became his personal attendant. So he appointed him over his house, and he put him in charge of all that was his.
From the time he appointed him over his house and in charge of all that was his, Jehovah kept blessing the house of the Egyptian because of Joseph, and Jehovah’s blessing came to be on all that he had in the house and in the field.
He eventually left everything that was his in Joseph’s care, and he gave no thought to anything except the food he was eating. Moreover, Joseph grew to be well-built and handsome.
Now after these things, the wife of his master began to cast her eyes on Joseph and say: “Lie down with me.”
But he refused and said to his master’s wife: “Here my master does not know what is with me in the house, and he has entrusted everything he has into my care.
There is no one greater in this house than I am, and he has not withheld from me anything at all except you, because you are his wife. So how could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?”
So day after day she spoke to Joseph, but he never consented to lie with her or to remain with her.
But on one of the days when he went into the house to do his work, none of the household servants were in the house.
Then she grabbed hold of him by his garment and said: “Lie down with me!” But he left his garment in her hand and fled outside.
As soon as she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and had fled outside,
she began to cry out to the men of her house and to say to them: “Look! He brought to us this Hebrew man to make us a laughingstock. He came to me to lie down with me, but I began to cry out at the top of my voice.
Then as soon as he heard me raising my voice and screaming, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.”
After that she laid his garment beside her until his master came to his house.
Then she told him the same thing, saying: “The Hebrew servant whom you brought to us came to me to make me a laughingstock.
But as soon as I raised my voice and began to scream, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.”
As soon as his master heard the words his wife spoke to him, saying: “These are the things your servant did to me,” his anger blazed.
So Joseph’s master took him and gave him over to the prison, the place where the prisoners of the king were kept under arrest, and he remained there in the prison.
But Jehovah continued with Joseph and kept showing loyal love to him and granting him favor in the eyes of the chief officer of the prison.
So the chief officer of the prison put Joseph in charge of all the prisoners in the prison, and everything that they were doing there, he was the one having it done.
The chief officer of the prison was looking after absolutely nothing that was in Joseph’s care, for Jehovah was with Joseph and Jehovah made whatever he did successful.
After these things, the chief cupbearer of the king of Egypt and the chief baker sinned against their lord, the king of Egypt.
So Pharʹaoh grew indignant at his two officers, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker,
and he committed them to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, to the place where Joseph was a prisoner.
Then the chief of the guard assigned Joseph to be with them and to take care of them, and they remained in jail for some time.
The cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison, each had a dream on the same night, and each dream had its own interpretation.
The next morning, when Joseph came in and saw them, they looked dejected.
So he asked the officers of Pharʹaoh who were in custody with him in his master’s house: “Why are your faces gloomy today?”
At this they said to him: “We each had a dream, but there is no interpreter with us.” Joseph said to them: “Do not interpretations belong to God? Relate it to me, please.”
So the chief cupbearer related his dream to Joseph, saying to him: “In my dream, there was a vine before me.
And on the vine, there were three twigs, and as it was sprouting shoots, it blossomed, and its clusters ripened into grapes.
And Pharʹaoh’s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes and squeezed them out into Pharʹaoh’s cup. After that I put the cup in Pharʹaoh’s hand.”
Then Joseph said to him: “This is its interpretation: The three twigs are three days.
Three days from now, Pharʹaoh will bring you out, restoring you to your office, and you will put Pharʹaoh’s cup into his hand as you did before when you were his cupbearer.
Nevertheless, you must remember me when things go well with you. Please show me loyal love and mention me to Pharʹaoh, in order to get me out of this place.
I was, in fact, kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews, and I have not done anything here for which they should put me in prison.”
When the chief baker saw that Joseph had interpreted something good, he said to him: “I too was in my dream, and there were three baskets of white bread on my head,
and in the top basket, there were all sorts of baked goods for Pharʹaoh, and there were birds eating them out of the basket on top of my head.”
Then Joseph answered, “This is its interpretation: The three baskets are three days.
Three days from now, Pharʹaoh will behead you and will hang you on a stake, and the birds will eat your flesh from you.”
Now the third day was Pharʹaoh’s birthday, and he made a feast for all his servants, and he brought out both the chief cupbearer and the chief baker in the presence of his servants.
And he returned the chief cupbearer to his post of cupbearer, and he continued to hand the cup to Pharʹaoh.
But he hanged the chief baker, just as Joseph had interpreted to them.
However, the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph; he kept forgetting him.
At the end of two full years, Pharʹaoh dreamed that he was standing by the Nile River.
And there, coming up from the river, were seven fine-looking, fat cows, and they were feeding on the Nile grass.
There were seven other cows that looked ugly and thin coming up after them from the Nile, and they stood alongside the fat cows by the bank of the Nile.
Then the ugly, thin cows began to eat up the seven fine-looking, fat cows. At this Pharʹaoh woke up.
Then he went back to sleep and had a second dream. There were seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk, full and choice.
And growing up after them were seven ears of grain that were thin and scorched by the east wind.
And the thin ears of grain began to swallow up the seven full and choice ears of grain. At this Pharʹaoh woke up and realized that it was a dream.
But in the morning, his spirit became agitated. So he sent for all the magic-practicing priests of Egypt and all her wise men. Pharʹaoh related his dreams to them, but there was no one who could interpret them for Pharʹaoh.
At that the chief cupbearer spoke with Pharʹaoh, saying: “I am confessing my sins today.
Pharʹaoh was indignant at his servants. So he committed me to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, both me and the chief baker.
After that we each had a dream on the same night. He and I each had a dream with its own interpretation.
And there with us was a young Hebrew man, a servant of the chief of the guard. When we related them to him, he interpreted for us the meaning of each dream.
It happened exactly as he had interpreted to us. I was restored to my office, but the other man was hanged.”
So Pharʹaoh sent for Joseph, and they brought him quickly from the prison. He shaved and changed his clothes and went in to Pharʹaoh.
Then Pharʹaoh said to Joseph: “I had a dream, but there is no one to interpret it. Now I have heard it said about you that you can hear a dream and interpret it.”
At this Joseph answered Pharʹaoh: “I need not be considered! God will speak concerning Pharʹaoh’s welfare.”
Pharʹaoh went on to say to Joseph: “In my dream I was standing on the bank of the Nile River.
And there, coming up from the Nile, were seven fine-looking, fat cows, and they began to feed on the Nile grass.
And there were seven other cows coming up after them, poor and very bad-looking and thin. I have never seen such bad-looking cows in all the land of Egypt.
And the skinny, bad cows began to eat up the first seven fat cows.
But when they had consumed them, no one could have known that they had done so, since their appearance was just as bad as at the start. At that I woke up.
“After that I saw in my dream seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk, full and choice.
Growing up after them were seven ears of shriveled grain, thin and scorched by the east wind.
Then the thin ears of grain began to swallow up the seven choice ears of grain. So I told it to the magic-practicing priests, but there was no one who could explain it to me.”
Then Joseph said to Pharʹaoh: “The dreams of Pharʹaoh are one and the same. The true God has told to Pharʹaoh what He will do.
The seven good cows are seven years. Likewise, the seven good ears of grain are seven years. The dreams are one and the same.
The seven skinny and bad cows that came up after them are seven years, and the seven empty ears of grain, scorched by the east wind, will prove to be seven years of famine.
This is just as I told to Pharʹaoh: The true God has caused Pharʹaoh to see what He will do.
“There are to be seven years of great abundance in all the land of Egypt.
But seven years of famine will certainly arise after them, and all the abundance in the land of Egypt will certainly be forgotten, and the famine will exhaust the land.
And the previous abundance in the land will not be remembered because of the famine afterward, for it will be very severe.
The dream was given twice to Pharʹaoh because the matter has been firmly established by the true God, and the true God will soon carry it out.
“So now let Pharʹaoh look for a man who is discreet and wise and place him over the land of Egypt.
Let Pharʹaoh take action and appoint overseers in the land, and he should collect one fifth of the produce of Egypt during the seven years of abundance.
And let them collect all the food during these coming good years, and let them stockpile grain under Pharʹaoh’s authority as food to be stored in the cities and safeguarded there.
The food should serve as a supply for the land for the seven years of famine that will occur in the land of Egypt, so that the land may not perish in the famine.”
This proposal seemed good to Pharʹaoh and all his servants.
So Pharʹaoh said to his servants: “Can another man be found like this one in whom there is the spirit of God?”
Pharʹaoh then said to Joseph: “Since God has caused you to know all of this, there is no one as discreet and wise as you.
You will personally be over my house, and all my people will obey you implicitly. Only in my role as king will I be greater than you.”
And Pharʹaoh added to Joseph: “See, I am putting you over all the land of Egypt.”
Then Pharʹaoh removed his signet ring from his own hand and put it on Joseph’s hand and clothed him with garments of fine linen and placed a necklace of gold around his neck.
Moreover, he had him ride in the second chariot of honor that he had, and they would call out ahead of him, “A·vrékh!” Thus he put him over all the land of Egypt.
Pharʹaoh further said to Joseph: “I am Pharʹaoh, but without your authorization, no man may do a single thing in all the land of Egypt.”
After that Pharʹaoh gave Joseph the name Zaphʹe·nath-pa·neʹah and gave him Asʹe·nath the daughter of Pot·iʹphe·ra the priest of On as a wife. And Joseph began to oversee the land of Egypt.
Joseph was  years old when he stood before Pharʹaoh king of Egypt.
And during the seven years of abundance, the land went on producing plentifully.
And he kept collecting all the food of the seven years from the land of Egypt, and he would stockpile the food in the cities. In each city he would store the food from the fields around it.
Joseph continued stockpiling grain in very great quantity, like the sand of the sea, until finally they gave up measuring it because it could not be measured.
Before the year of the famine arrived, two sons were born to Joseph, whom Asʹe·nath the daughter of Pot·iʹphe·ra the priest of On bore to him.
When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons: “Why do you just keep looking at one another?”
He added: “I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and buy some for us, so that we may stay alive and not die.”
So ten of Joseph’s brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
But Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, with his other brothers, for he said: “Perhaps a fatal accident may befall him.”
So Israel’s sons came along with the others who were coming to buy, because the famine had extended to the land of Caʹnaan.
Joseph was the man in authority over the land, and he was the one who sold grain to all the people of the earth. So Joseph’s brothers came and bowed low to him with their faces to the ground.
The proverbs of Solʹo·mon, the son of David, the king of Israel:
To learn wisdom and discipline;
To acquire the discipline that gives insight,
To impart shrewdness to the inexperienced;
A wise person listens and takes in more instruction;
To understand a proverb and a puzzling saying,
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge.
Listen, my son, to the discipline of your father,
They are an attractive wreath for your head
My son, if sinners try to entice you, do not consent.
If they say: “Come with us.
We will swallow them alive as the Grave does,
Let us seize all their precious treasures;
You should join us,
My son, do not follow them.
For their feet run to do evil;
It is surely in vain to spread a net in full sight of a bird.
That is why these lie in ambush to shed blood;
These are the ways of those seeking dishonest profit,
True wisdom cries aloud in the street.
At the corner of the busy streets it calls out.
“How long will you inexperienced ones love inexperience?
Respond to my reproof.
Because I called out, but you kept refusing,
You kept neglecting all my advice
I also will laugh when disaster strikes you;
When what you dread comes like a storm,
At that time they will keep calling me, but I will not answer;
Because they hated knowledge,
They refused my advice;
So they will bear the consequences of their way,
My son, if you accept my sayings
By making your ear attentive to wisdom
Moreover, if you call out for understanding
If you keep seeking for it as for silver,
Then you will understand the fear of Jehovah,
For Jehovah himself gives wisdom;
He treasures up practical wisdom for the upright;
He watches over the paths of justice,
Then you will understand what is righteous and just and fair,
When wisdom enters your heart
Thinking ability will keep watch over you,
To save you from the bad course,
From those leaving the upright paths
From those who rejoice in wrongdoing,
Those whose paths are crooked
It will save you from the wayward woman,
Who abandons the close companion of her youth
For her house sinks down into death,
None of those having relations with her will return,
So follow the way of good people
For only the upright will reside in the earth,
As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth,
My son, do not forget my teaching,
Because they will add many days
Do not let loyal love and faithfulness leave you.
Then you will find favor and good insight
Trust in Jehovah with all your heart,
In all your ways take notice of him,
Do not become wise in your own eyes.
It will be a healing to your body
Honor Jehovah with your valuable things,
Then your storehouses will be completely filled,
My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah,
For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves,
Happy is the man who finds wisdom
To gain it is better than gaining silver,
It is more precious than corals;
Long life is in its right hand;
Its ways are pleasant,
It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it,
Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom.
By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apart
My son, do not lose sight of them.
They will give you life
Then you will walk on your way in safety,
When you lie down, you will have no fear;
You will not fear any sudden terror
For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence;
Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it
Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,”
Do not plot harm against your neighbor
Do not quarrel with a man for no reason
Do not envy the violent man
Listen, my sons, to the discipline of a father;
For I will give you good instruction;
I was a true son to my father
He taught me and said: “May your heart hold fast to my words.
Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding.
Do not forsake it, and it will protect you.
Wisdom is the most important thing, so acquire wisdom,
Highly esteem it, and it will exalt you.
It will place an attractive wreath on your head;
Listen, my son, and accept my sayings,
I will instruct you in the way of wisdom;
When you walk, your steps will not be hindered;
Hold on to discipline; do not let it go.
Do not enter the path of the wicked,
Shun it, do not take it;
For they cannot sleep unless they do what is bad.
They feed themselves with the bread of wickedness,
But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light
The way of the wicked is like the darkness;
My son, pay attention to my words;
Do not lose sight of them;
For they are life to those who find them
Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart,
Put crooked speech away from you,
Your eyes should look straight ahead,
Smooth out the course of your feet,
Do not incline to the right or the left.
My son, pay attention to my wisdom.
So that you may guard your thinking abilities
For the lips of a wayward woman drip like a honeycomb,
But in the end she is as bitter as wormwood
Her feet descend into death.
She gives no thought to the path of life.
Now, my sons, listen to me
Stay far away from her;
So that you may not give your dignity to others
So that strangers may not drain your resources
Otherwise, you will groan at the end of your life
And you say: “How I hated discipline!
I did not listen to the voice of my instructors
I have come to the brink of complete ruin
Drink water from your own cistern
Should your springs be dispersed outside,
Let them be for you alone,
May your own fountain be blessed,
A loving doe, a graceful mountain goat.
So why, my son, should you be captivated by a wayward woman
For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah;
The wicked one is ensnared by his own errors,
He will die for lack of discipline
My son, if you have put up security for your neighbor,
If you have been ensnared by your promise,
Do this, my son, and free yourself,
Do not allow your eyes to sleep,
Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand,
Go to the ant, you lazy one;
Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler,
It prepares its food in the summer,
How long, you lazy one, will you lie there?
A little sleep, a little slumbering,
And your poverty will come like a bandit,
A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech;
He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers.
With a perverted heart,
Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly;
There are six things that Jehovah hates;
Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,
A heart plotting wicked schemes, and feet that run quickly to evil,
A false witness who lies with every breath,
Observe, my son, the commandment of your father,
Always bind them around your heart;
When you walk about, it will lead you;
For the commandment is a lamp,
They will guard you against the bad woman,
Do not desire her beauty in your heart
For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread,
Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments?
Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet?
It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife;
People do not despise a thief
Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold;
My son, keep my sayings,
Keep my commandments and live;
Tie them around your fingers;
Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,”
To guard you against the wayward woman,
From the window of my house,
And as I observed the naive ones,
He passed along the street near her corner,
In the twilight, in the evening,
Then I saw a woman meet him,
She is loud and defiant.
One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares,
She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss;
“I had to offer communion sacrifices.
That is why I came out to meet you,
I have spread fine covers upon my bed,
I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning;
For my husband is not at home;
He took a bag of money with him,
She misleads him with great persuasiveness.
Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter,
Until an arrow pierces his liver;
And now, my sons, listen to me;
Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways.
For she has caused many to fall down slain,
Her house leads to the Grave;
Is not wisdom calling out?
On the heights along the road,
Next to the gates leading into the city,
“To you, O people, I am calling;
You inexperienced ones, learn shrewdness;
Listen, for what I say is important,
For my mouth softly utters truth,
All the sayings of my mouth are righteous.
They are all straightforward to the discerning
Take my discipline instead of silver,
For wisdom is better than corals;
I, wisdom, dwell together with shrewdness;
The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad.
I possess good advice and practical wisdom;
By me kings keep reigning,
By me princes keep ruling,
I love those loving me,
Riches and glory are with me,
My fruitage is better than gold, even refined gold,
I walk in the path of righteousness,
I give a rich inheritance to those who love me,
Jehovah produced me as the beginning of his way,
From ancient times I was installed,
When there were no deep waters, I was brought forth,
Before the mountains were set in place,
When he had not yet made the earth and its fields
When he prepared the heavens, I was there;
When he established the clouds above,
When he set a decree for the sea
Then I was beside him as a master worker.
I rejoiced over his habitable earth,
True wisdom has built its house;
It has fully prepared its meat;
It has sent out its female servants
“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.”
“Come, eat my bread
Leave behind your inexperience and live;
The one who corrects a ridiculer invites dishonor,
Do not reprove a ridiculer, or he will hate you.
Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser.
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom,
For by me your days will be many,
If you become wise, you are wise to your own advantage,
A stupid woman is loud.
She sits at the entrance of her house
Calling out to those passing by,
“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.”
“Stolen waters are sweet,
But he does not know that those powerless in death are there,
Proverbs of Solʹo·mon.
The treasures gained by wickedness will be of no benefit,
Jehovah will not cause the righteous one to go hungry,
Idle hands will cause poverty,
The son acting with insight gathers the crop in summer,
Blessings are on the head of the righteous one,
The memory of the righteous one is due for a blessing,
The wisehearted person will accept instructions,
The one walking in integrity will walk in security,
The one who slyly winks his eye causes grief,
The mouth of the righteous one is a source of life,
Hatred is what stirs up contentions,
Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning person,
Those who are wise treasure up knowledge,
The wealth of a rich man is his fortified city.
The activity of the righteous one leads to life;
The one who heeds discipline is a path to life,
The one who conceals his hatred speaks lies,
When words are many, transgression cannot be avoided,
The tongue of the righteous one is like the finest silver,
The lips of the righteous one nourish many,
It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich,
Engaging in shameful conduct is like a game to the stupid one,
What the wicked one fears will come upon him;
When the storm passes by, the wicked one will be no more,
Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes,
The fear of Jehovah prolongs life,
The expectation of the righteous brings joy,
The way of Jehovah is a stronghold for the blameless one,
The righteous one will never be made to fall,
The mouth of the righteous one produces wisdom,
Dishonest scales are detestable to Jehovah,
When presumptuousness comes, dishonor will follow,
The integrity of the upright is what guides them,
Wealth will be of no benefit on the day of fury,
The righteousness of the blameless one makes his path straight,
The righteousness of the upright will rescue them,
When a wicked man dies, his hope perishes;
The righteous one is rescued from distress,
By his mouth the apostate brings his neighbor to ruin,
The goodness of the righteous makes a city rejoice,
Because of the blessing of the upright a city is exalted,
Whoever is lacking good sense shows contempt for his neighbor,
A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk,
When there is no skillful direction, the people fall,
Whoever guarantees a loan for a stranger is sure to fare badly,
A gracious woman acquires glory,
A kind man benefits himself,
The wicked one earns deceptive wages,
The one standing firmly for righteousness is in line for life,
Those crooked at heart are detestable to Jehovah,
Be assured of this: An evil person will not go unpunished,
Like a gold ring in the snout of a pig
The desire of the righteous leads to good,
One gives generously and ends up with more;
The generous person will prosper,
The people will curse the one who withholds grain,
The one who diligently seeks to do good seeks favor,
The one trusting in his riches will fall,
Anyone who brings trouble on his household will inherit the wind,
The fruitage of the righteous one is a tree of life,
If, indeed, the righteous one on earth is rewarded,
The one who loves discipline loves knowledge,
The good person obtains Jehovah’s approval,
No man is made secure by wickedness,
A capable wife is a crown to her husband,
The thoughts of the righteous are just,
The words of the wicked are a deadly ambush,
When the wicked are overthrown, they are no more,
A man is praised for the discretion of his mouth,
Better to be lightly esteemed and have a servant
The righteous one takes care of his domestic animals,
The one who cultivates his land will be satisfied with food,
The wicked man envies what other evil men have caught,
The evil man is ensnared by his own sinful speech,
From the fruitage of his speech a man is satisfied with good,
The way of the fool is right in his own eyes,
A fool immediately shows his annoyance,
The one who testifies faithfully will tell the truth,
Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword,
Truthful lips will endure forever,
Deceit is in the heart of those who plot mischief,
No harm will befall the righteous one,
Lying lips are detestable to Jehovah,
A shrewd man conceals what he knows,
The hand of the diligent ones will rule,
Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,
The righteous one searches out his pastures,
The lazy do not chase after the prey,
The path of righteousness leads to life;
A wise son accepts his father’s discipline,
From the fruitage of his speech a man will eat what is good,
The one guarding his mouth protects his life,
The lazy person has his cravings, yet he has nothing,
The righteous one hates lies,
Righteousness protects the one whose way is innocent,
There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has nothing;
Riches are the ransom for a man’s life,
The light of the righteous shines brightly,
Presumptuousness leads only to strife,
Wealth quickly gained will dwindle,
Expectation postponed makes the heart sick,
Whoever despises instruction will pay the penalty,
The teaching of the wise one is a source of life
Keen insight wins favor,
The shrewd person acts with knowledge,
A wicked messenger falls into trouble,
Whoever neglects discipline comes to poverty and disgrace,
Desire when realized is sweet to a person,
The one walking with the wise will become wise,
Calamity pursues sinners,
The good person leaves an inheritance to his grandchildren,
The plowed field of the poor yields much food,
Whoever holds back his rod hates his son,
The righteous one eats and satisfies his appetite,
The truly wise woman builds up her house,
The one walking in his uprightness fears Jehovah,
The rod of haughtiness is in the mouth of the fool,
Where there are no cattle the manger is clean,
A faithful witness will not lie,
The scoffer seeks wisdom and finds none,
Stay away from the foolish man,
By wisdom the shrewd man understands the way he is going,
Fools make fun of guilt,
The heart knows its own bitterness,
The house of the wicked will be destroyed,
There is a way that seems right to a man,
Even in laughter the heart may feel pain,
The one wayward at heart will reap the results of his ways,
The naive person believes every word,
The wise one is cautious and turns away from evil,
The one who is quick to anger acts foolishly,
The naive will inherit foolishness,
Bad people will have to bow down before the good,
The poor man is hated even by his neighbors,
The one who despises his neighbor sins,
Will not those who plot mischief go astray?
There is benefit in every kind of hard work,
The crown of the wise is their wealth;
A true witness saves lives,
There is strong confidence in the fear of Jehovah,
The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life,
A multitude of people are a king’s majesty,
The one who is slow to anger has great discernment,
A calm heart gives life to the body,
The one who defrauds the lowly one insults his Maker,
A mild answer turns away rage,
The tongue of the wise makes good use of knowledge,
The eyes of Jehovah are everywhere,
A calm tongue is a tree of life,
A fool disrespects his father’s discipline,
In the house of the righteous one there is abundant treasure,
The lips of the wise spread knowledge,
The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to Jehovah,
Jehovah detests the way of the wicked one,
Discipline seems bad to one forsaking the way,
The Grave and the place of destruction are in full view of Jehovah.
The scoffer does not love the one correcting him.
A joyful heart makes for a cheerful countenance,
The understanding heart seeks knowledge,
All the days of the afflicted one are bad,
Better is a little in the fear of Jehovah
Better is a dish of vegetables where there is love
A hot-tempered man stirs up strife,
The way of the lazy one is like a hedge of thorns,
A wise son makes his father rejoice,
Foolishness is a joy to one lacking good sense,
Plans fail when there is no consultation,
A man rejoices in giving the right answer,
The path of life leads upward to one with insight,
Jehovah will tear down the house of the haughty,
Jehovah detests the schemes of the wicked one,
The one making dishonest profit brings trouble on his own household,
The heart of the righteous one meditates before answering,
Jehovah is far away from the wicked,
Bright eyes make the heart rejoice;
The one who listens to life-giving reproof
A man prepares the thoughts of his heart,
All of a man’s ways seem right to him,
Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,
Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose,
Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah.
By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for,
When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways,
Better is a little with righteousness
A man may plot out his course in his heart,
Inspired decision should be on the lips of a king;
Honest balances and scales are from Jehovah;
Wicked practices are detestable to kings,
Righteous speech is a pleasure to kings.
The king’s rage is like a messenger of death,
In the light of the king’s face there is life;
How much better to acquire wisdom than gold!
The highway of the upright avoids what is bad.
Pride is before a crash,
Better to be humble among the meek
The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,
The wise in heart will be called understanding,
Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it,
The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight
Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb,
There is a way that seems right to a man,
The appetite of a laborer makes him work hard
A worthless man digs up what is bad;
A troublemaker causes dissension,
A violent man entices his neighbor
He winks his eye as he schemes harm.
Gray hair is a crown of beauty
Better is a piece of dry bread where there is peace
A servant with insight will rule over a son who acts shamefully;
The refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold,
A wicked man pays attention to hurtful speech,
Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker,
Grandsons are a crown to the aged,
Upright speech does not befit a fool.
A gift is like a precious stone to its owner;
Whoever forgives a transgression seeks love,
A rebuke makes a deeper impression on one having understanding
A bad man seeks only rebellion,
Better to meet a bear bereaved of her cubs
If anyone repays bad for good,
Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate;
Anyone who acquits the wicked one and anyone who condemns the righteous one
What good is it that the stupid one has the means to acquire wisdom
A true friend shows love at all times
A man lacking good sense shakes hands and agrees
The one who loves conflict loves transgression.
The one who is crooked at heart will not find success,
The one who fathers a stupid child will experience grief;
A joyful heart is good medicine,
A wicked man will take a bribe in secret
Wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person,
A stupid son brings grief to his father
To punish the righteous one is not good,
A man of knowledge restrains his words,
Even a fool who keeps silent will be considered wise,
Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires;
A stupid person takes no pleasure in understanding;
When a wicked person comes, contempt also comes,
The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters.
It is not good to show partiality to the wicked one
The speech of the stupid one leads to quarrels,
The mouth of the stupid is his ruin,
The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;
Whoever is lazy in his work
The name of Jehovah is a strong tower.
The wealth of the rich is his fortified city;
Before a crash a man’s heart is lofty,
When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts,
A person’s spirit can sustain him through illness,
The heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge,
A man’s gift opens the way for him;
The first to state his case seems right,
Casting lots puts an end to disputes
A brother offended is more unyielding than a fortified city,
From the fruitage of a man’s speech his stomach will be filled;
Death and life are in the power of the tongue;
The one who finds a good wife has found something good,
The poor man implores when speaking,
There are companions ready to crush one another,
It is better to be poor and walk in integrity
A person without knowledge is not good,
It is a man’s own foolishness that distorts his way,
Wealth attracts many friends,
A false witness will not go unpunished,
Many seek the favor of a noble,
All the brothers of a poor man hate him;
Whoever acquires good sense loves himself.
A false witness will not go unpunished,
It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury;
The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger,
The king’s rage is like the growling of a lion,
A stupid son brings adversity on his father,
A house and wealth are inherited from fathers,
Laziness brings on a deep sleep,
The one who keeps the commandment keeps his life;
The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah,
Discipline your son while there is hope,
The hot-tempered man will pay the penalty;
Listen to counsel and accept discipline,
Many are the plans in a man’s heart,
The desirable thing in a man is his loyal love;
The fear of Jehovah leads to life;
The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl,
Strike the ridiculer, so that the inexperienced one may become shrewd,
The one who mistreats his father and drives away his mother
My son, if you stop listening to discipline,
A worthless witness mocks justice,
Judgment is in store for ridiculers,
Wine is a ridiculer, alcohol is unruly;
The terror of a king is like the growling of a lion;
It is honorable for a man to refrain from a dispute,
The lazy one does not plow in winter,
The thoughts of a man’s heart are like deep waters,
Many men proclaim their loyal love,
The righteous one is walking in his integrity.
When the king sits on the throne to judge,
Who can say: “I have cleansed my heart;
Dishonest weights and false measures
Even a child is known by his actions,
The hearing ear and the seeing eye
Do not love sleep, or you will come to poverty.
“It is no good, it is no good!” says the buyer;
There is gold, also much coral,
Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger;
Bread gained by deceit tastes good to a man,
By consultation, plans will succeed,
A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk;
Whoever curses his father and his mother,
An inheritance obtained first by greed
Do not say: “I will pay back evil!”
Dishonest weights are detestable to Jehovah,
A man’s footsteps are directed by Jehovah;
It is a snare for a man to cry out rashly, “Holy!”
A wise king sifts out the wicked
The breath of a man is the lamp of Jehovah,
Loyal love and faithfulness safeguard the king;
The glory of young men is their strength,
Bruises and wounds purge away evil,
A king’s heart is like streams of water in Jehovah’s hand.
All of a man’s ways seem right to him,
To do what is right and just
Haughty eyes and an arrogant heart
The plans of the diligent surely lead to success,
Gaining treasures by a lying tongue
The violence of the wicked will sweep them away,
The way of a guilty man is crooked,
Better to dwell on a corner of the roof
The wicked man craves what is bad;
When a ridiculer is punished, the inexperienced become wiser,
The Righteous One observes the house of the wicked one;
Whoever stops up his ear to the cry of the lowly one
A secret gift subdues anger,
It is a joy for the righteous one to act with justice,
The man who strays from the way of insight
The one who loves having a good time will come to poverty;
The wicked one is a ransom for the righteous one,
Better to dwell in the wilderness
Precious treasure and oil are found in the house of the wise,
Whoever pursues righteousness and loyal love
A wise man can scale the city of the mighty
The one guarding his mouth and his tongue
A presumptuous, arrogant braggart is what you call
What the lazy man craves will put him to death,
All day long he greedily craves,
The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable.
A lying witness will perish,
The wicked man puts on a bold face,
There is no wisdom, nor discernment, nor counsel in opposition to Jehovah.
The horse is prepared for the day of battle,
A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth;
The rich and the poor have this in common:
The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself,
The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah
Thorns and traps are in the crooked man’s path,
Train a boy in the way he should go;
The rich one rules the poor,
Whoever sows unrighteousness will reap disaster,
The generous person will be blessed,
Drive away the scornful man,
The one who loves a pure heart and whose speech is gracious
The eyes of Jehovah safeguard knowledge,
The lazy one says: “There is a lion outside!
The mouth of wayward women is a deep pit.
Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy,
The one defrauding the poor to increase his wealth
Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise,
For it is pleasant to keep them deep within you,
For your confidence to be in Jehovah,
Have I not already written you,
To teach you true and reliable words,
Do not rob the poor man because he is poor,
For Jehovah himself will plead their cause
Do not keep company with a hot-tempered man
So that you never learn his ways
Do not be among those who shake hands in a pledge,
If you have nothing to pay,
Do not move an ancient boundary marker
Have you seen a man skillful at his work?
When you sit down to eat with a king,
Put a knife to your throat
Do not crave his delicacies,
Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth.
When you cast your eyes on it, it is not there,
Do not eat the food of a stingy person;
For he is like one keeping accounts.
You will vomit up the morsels you have eaten
Do not speak in the ears of the stupid one,
Do not move an ancient boundary marker
For their Defender is strong;
Apply your heart to discipline
Do not hold back discipline from a boy.
With the rod you should strike him,
My son, if your heart becomes wise,
My innermost being will find joy
Let your heart not envy sinners,
For then you will have a future
Listen, my son, and become wise,
Do not be among those who drink too much wine,
For a drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty,
Listen to your father who caused your birth,
Buy truth and never sell it,
The father of a righteous one will surely be joyful;
Your father and your mother will rejoice,
My son, do give your heart to me,
For a prostitute is a deep pit,
She lies in wait like a robber;
Who has woe? Who has uneasiness?
Those lingering long over wine;
Do not look at the wine’s red color
Do not envy evil men,
For their heart meditates on violence,
By wisdom a house is built up,
By knowledge its rooms are filled
A wise man is powerful,
By skillful direction you will wage your war,
True wisdom is unattainable for a fool;
Anyone who plots evil
Foolish schemes are sinful,
If you become discouraged in the day of distress,
Rescue those who are being taken away to death,
If you say, “But we did not know about this,”
My son, eat honey, because it is good;
Likewise, know that wisdom is good for you.
Do not wickedly lie in ambush near the home of the righteous one;
For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again,
When your enemy falls, do not rejoice,
Otherwise, Jehovah will see and be displeased,
Do not be upset because of evil men;
For there is no future for anyone evil;
My son, fear Jehovah and the king.
For their disaster will arise suddenly.
These sayings also belong to the wise:
Whoever says to the wicked one, “You are righteous,”
But it will go well for those reproving him;
People will kiss the lips of the one replying honestly.
Prepare your outside work, and get everything ready in the field;
Do not testify against your neighbor without grounds.
Do not say: “I will do to him just as he has done to me;
I passed by the field of the lazy one,
I saw that it was overgrown with weeds;
These also are the proverbs of Solʹo·mon, which the men of Hez·e·kiʹah the king of Judah transcribed:
It is the glory of God to keep a matter secret,
As the heavens are high and the earth is deep,
Remove the dross from the silver,
Remove the wicked one from the king’s presence,
Do not honor yourself before the king,
For it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,”
Do not rush into a legal dispute,
Plead your case with your neighbor,
So that the one listening will not put you to shame
Like apples of gold in silver carvings
Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine gold
Just like the coldness of snow on the day of harvest
Like clouds and wind that bring no rain
By patience a commander is won over,
If you find honey, eat only what you need,
Rarely set foot in your neighbor’s house,
Like a war club and a sword and a sharp arrow
Like a broken tooth or an unsteady foot
Like one who removes a garment on a cold day
If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat;
For you will be heaping burning coals on his head,
The north wind brings a downpour,
Better to dwell on a corner of the roof
Like cold water on a tired soul
Like a muddied spring and a ruined well
It is not good to eat too much honey,
As a city broken through, without a wall,
Like snow in summer and rain at harvesttime,
Just as a bird has reason to flee and a swallow to fly,
A whip is for the horse, a bridle is for the donkey,
Do not answer the stupid one according to his foolishness,
Answer the stupid one according to his foolishness,
Like someone who cripples his own feet and harms himself
Like the limp legs of the lame,
Like tying a stone to a sling,
Like a thorn plant that comes into the hand of a drunkard,
Like an archer who wounds at random,
Like a dog that returns to its vomit,
Have you seen a man who thinks he is wise?
The lazy one says: “There is a young lion in the road,
A door keeps turning on its hinges,
The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl,
The lazy one thinks he is wiser
Like someone grabbing hold of a dog’s ears
Like a madman who shoots fiery missiles, arrows, and death
Is the man who plays a trick on his neighbor and says, “I was only joking!”
Where there is no wood, the fire goes out,
As charcoal for the embers and wood for the fire,
The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;
Like a silver glazing over a piece of earthenware
The one who hates others disguises it with his lips,
Although he speaks graciously, do not trust him,
Though his hatred is concealed by deceit,
The one who digs a pit will fall into it,
A lying tongue hates those crushed by it,
Do not boast about tomorrow,
Let someone else praise you, and not your own mouth;
A stone is heavy and sand is weighty,
There is the cruelty of rage and the flood of anger,
Open reproof is better than concealed love.
The wounds inflicted by a friend are faithful,
One whose appetite is satisfied turns down honey from the comb,
Like a bird that strays from its nest
Oil and incense make the heart rejoice;
Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend,
Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice,
The shrewd person sees the danger and conceals himself,
Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger;
When someone blesses his fellow man with a loud voice early in the morning,
A quarrelsome wife is like a constantly leaking roof on a rainy day.
Whoever can restrain her can restrain the wind
As iron sharpens iron,
The one who cares for a fig tree will eat its fruit,
As water reflects one’s face,
The Grave and the place of destruction are never satisfied,
As the refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold,
Even if you pound a fool with a pestle
You should know well the appearance of your flock.
For wealth does not last forever,
The green grass disappears, new grass appears,
The young rams provide your clothing,
And there will be enough goat’s milk to feed you,
The wicked flee when no one pursues them,
When there is transgression in the land, it will have one prince after another,
A poor man who defrauds the lowly
Those who abandon the law praise the wicked one,
Evil men cannot understand justice,
Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity
An understanding son observes the law,
The one who increases his wealth by interest and usury
The one refusing to listen to the law
The one misleading the upright into an evil course will fall into his own pit,
A rich man is wise in his own eyes,
When the righteous triumph, there is great glory,
The one covering over his transgressions will not succeed,
Happy is the man who is always on guard,
Like a growling lion and a charging bear
A leader without discernment abuses his power,
A man burdened with bloodguilt for taking someone’s life will keep fleeing until the grave.
The one walking faultlessly will be saved,
The one cultivating his ground will have plenty of bread,
A faithful man will receive many blessings,
It is not good to show partiality;
An envious man is eager for wealth,
Whoever reproves a man will afterward find more favor
Whoever robs his father and mother and says, “It is not wrong,”
The greedy person stirs up dissension,
Whoever trusts in his own heart is stupid,
Whoever gives to the poor will lack nothing,
When the wicked rise to power, a man hides himself,
A man who stiffens his neck after much reproof
When the righteous are many, the people rejoice,
A man who loves wisdom makes his father rejoice,
By justice a king brings stability to a land,
A man who flatters his neighbor
A bad man’s transgression ensnares him,
The righteous one is concerned about the legal rights of the poor,
Boastful men inflame a town,
When a wise man enters into a controversy with a fool,
Bloodthirsty men hate anyone innocent,
A stupid person gives vent to all his feelings,
When a ruler pays attention to lies,
The poor man and the oppressor have this in common:
When a king judges the poor fairly,
The rod and reproof impart wisdom,
When the wicked increase, transgression increases,
Discipline your son and he will bring you rest;
Where there is no vision, the people go unrestrained,
A servant will not let himself be corrected by words,
Have you seen a man hasty with his words?
If a servant is pampered from his youth,
A man prone to anger stirs up strife;
The haughtiness of a man will humble him,
The partner of a thief hates himself.
Trembling at men is a snare,
Many seek an audience with a ruler,
An unjust man is detestable to the righteous,
The weighty message contained in the words of Aʹgur son of Jaʹkeh, which he spoke to Ithʹi·el, to Ithʹi·el and Uʹcal.
I am more ignorant than anyone else,
I have not learned wisdom,
Who has ascended to heaven and then descended?
Every saying of God is refined.
Add nothing to his words,
Two things I ask of you.
Remove untruth and lies far from me.
So that I do not become satisfied and deny you and say, “Who is Jehovah?”
Do not slander a servant to his master,
There is a generation that curses its father
There is a generation that is pure in its own eyes
There is a generation whose eyes are so haughty
There is a generation whose teeth are swords
The leeches have two daughters that cry, “Give! Give!”
—The Grave and a barren womb,
The eye that mocks a father and despises obedience to a mother
There are three things that are beyond my comprehension,
The way of an eagle in the heavens,
This is the way of an adulterous woman:
There are three things that make the earth shudder
When a slave rules as king,
When a hated woman is taken as a wife,
Four things on earth are among the smallest,
The ants are not strong creatures,
The rock badgers are not mighty creatures,
The locusts have no king,
The gecko lizard clings with its feet,
There are three things that have an impressive stride,
The lion, the mightiest among beasts,
The greyhound; the male goat;
The words of King Lemʹu·el, the weighty message his mother gave to instruct him:
What should I tell you, O my son,
Do not give your vigor to women,
It is not for kings, O Lemʹu·el,
So that they do not drink and forget what is decreed
Give alcohol to those who are perishing
Let them drink and forget their poverty;
Speak up in behalf of the speechless;
Speak up and judge righteously;
Who can find a capable wife?
Her husband trusts her from his heart,
She rewards him with good, not bad,
She obtains wool and linen;
She is like the ships of a merchant,
She also rises while it is still night,
She sets her mind on a field and buys it;
She prepares herself for hard work,
She sees that her trading is profitable;
Her hands seize the distaff,
She extends her palm to the lowly one,
She does not worry about her household because of the snow,
She makes her own bed covers.
Her husband is well-known in the city gates,
She makes and sells linen garments
She is clothed with strength and splendor,
She opens her mouth in wisdom;
She watches over the activity of her household,
Her children rise up and declare her happy;
There are many capable women,
Charm may be false, and beauty may be fleeting,
Give her the reward for what she does,
The words of the congregator, the son of David, the king in Jerusalem.
“The greatest futility!” says the congregator,
What does a person gain from all his hard work
A generation is going, and a generation is coming,
The sun rises, and the sun sets;
The wind goes south and circles around to the north;
All the streams flow into the sea, yet the sea is not full.
All things are wearisome;
What has been is what will be,
Is there anything of which one may say, “Look at this—it is new”?
No one remembers people of former times;
I, the congregator, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem.
Then I said in my heart: “Come and let me try out pleasure and see what good comes.” But look! that too was futility.
I said about laughter, “It is madness!”
I explored with my heart by indulging myself with wine, all the while maintaining my own wisdom; I even embraced foolishness to find out what was the best thing for humans to do during their few days of life under the heavens.
I undertook great works. I built houses for myself; I planted vineyards for myself.
I made gardens and parks for myself, and I planted in them all sorts of fruit trees.
I made pools of water for myself, to irrigate a grove of flourishing trees.
I acquired male and female servants, and I had servants born in my household. I also acquired much livestock—cattle and flocks—more than any of my predecessors in Jerusalem.
I accumulated silver and gold for myself, the treasures of kings and of provinces. I gathered male and female singers for myself, as well as what brings great pleasure to the sons of men—a woman, yes, many women.
So I grew great and surpassed anyone prior to me in Jerusalem. And my wisdom remained with me.
I did not deny myself anything that I desired. I did not withhold from my heart any sort of pleasure, for my heart was joyful because of all my hard work, and this was my reward for all my hard work.
But when I reflected on all the works that my own hands had done and on all the hard work that I had toiled to accomplish, I saw that everything was futile, a chasing after the wind; there was nothing of real value under the sun.
Then I turned my attention to wisdom and madness and folly. (For what can the man do who comes after the king? Only what has already been done.)
There is an appointed time for everything,
A time for birth and a time to die;
A time to kill and a time to heal;
A time to weep and a time to laugh;
A time to throw stones away and a time to gather stones together;
A time to search and a time to give up as lost;
A time to rip apart and a time to sew together;
A time to love and a time to hate;
What does the worker gain from all his efforts?
I have seen the occupation that God has given to the sons of men to keep them occupied.
He has made everything beautiful in its time. He has even put eternity in their heart; yet mankind will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish.
I have concluded that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and to do good during their life,
Again I turned my attention to all the acts of oppression that go on under the sun. I saw the tears of the oppressed, and there was no one to comfort them. And their oppressors had the power, and there was no one to comfort them.
And I congratulated the dead who had already died rather than the living who were still alive.
And better off than both of them is the one who has not yet been born, who has not seen the distressing deeds that are done under the sun.
And I have seen how much effort and skillful work spring from rivalry between people; this too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
The stupid one folds his hands while his flesh wastes away.
Better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind.
I turned my attention to another example of futility under the sun:
There is a man who is all alone, without any companion; he has no son or brother, but there is no end to all his hard work. His eyes are never satisfied with riches. But does he ask himself, ‘For whom am I working hard and depriving myself of good things’? This too is futility and a miserable occupation.
Two are better than one because they have a good reward for their hard work.
For if one of them falls, the other can help his partner up. But what will happen to the one who falls with no one to help him up?
Moreover, if two lie down together, they will stay warm, but how can just one keep warm?
And someone may overpower one alone, but two together can take a stand against him. And a threefold cord cannot quickly be torn apart.
Watch your step whenever you go to the house of the true God; it is better to draw near to listen than to give a sacrifice as the stupid ones do, for they are not aware that what they are doing is bad.
Do not be quick with your mouth, nor let your heart speak rashly before the true God, for the true God is in the heavens but you are on the earth. That is why your words should be few.
For a dream comes from too many preoccupations, and the chatter of the stupid one comes from too many words.
Whenever you make a vow to God, do not delay to pay it, for he finds no pleasure in the stupid ones. What you vow, pay.
Better for you not to vow than to vow and not pay.
Do not allow your mouth to cause you to sin, and do not say before the angel that it was a mistake. Why make the true God indignant over what you say so that he has to destroy the work of your hands?
For just as many preoccupations lead to dreams, so, too, many words lead to futility. But fear the true God.
If you see any oppression of the poor and a violation of justice and righteousness in your district, do not be surprised about the matter. For that high official is being watched by one who is higher than he is, and there are others who are still higher than they are.
Also, the profit of the land is divided among them all; even the king is served by the field.
A lover of silver will never be satisfied with silver, nor a lover of wealth with income. This too is futility.
When good things increase, those consuming them increase. And what advantage is it to the owner, except to look at them with his eyes?
Sweet is the sleep of the one serving, whether he eats little or much, but the plenty belonging to the rich one does not permit him to sleep.
There is another tragedy that I have seen under the sun, and it is common among men:
The true God gives a man riches and material possessions and glory, so that he lacks nothing that he desires; yet the true God does not enable him to enjoy them, although a stranger may enjoy them. This is futility and a severe affliction.
If a man should become a father a hundred times and live for many years and reach old age, yet he does not enjoy his good things before he reaches the grave, I must say that a stillborn child is better off than he is.
For this one came in vain and went away in darkness, and his name is shrouded in darkness.
Even though he never saw the sun or knew anything, he is still better off than the former one.
What is the benefit of living a thousand years twice over but not experiencing enjoyment? Do not all go to the same place?
All the hard work of a man is to fill his mouth; yet his appetite is never satisfied.
For what advantage does the wise one have over the stupid one, or of what benefit is it that the poor man knows how to survive?
Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
Whatever has come to be has already been named, and it is known what man is; and he is not able to dispute with the one more powerful than he.
The more words, the more futility; and what advantage do they bring to man?
Who knows what is best for a man to do in life during the few days of his futile life, which he spends like a shadow? For who can tell man what will happen under the sun after he is gone?
A good name is better than good oil, and the day of death is better than the day of birth.
Better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting, for that is the end of every man, and the living should take it to heart.
Better is distress than laughter, for the sadness of the face makes the heart better.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of the stupid is in the house of rejoicing.
Better to listen to a wise man’s rebuke than to listen to the song of fools.
For as the crackling of thorns burning under the pot, so is the laughter of the fool; and this too is futility.
But oppression can drive the wise one into madness, and a bribe corrupts the heart.
Better is the end of a matter than its beginning. Better to be patient than to be haughty in spirit.
Do not be quick to take offense, for the taking of offense lodges in the bosom of fools.
Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.
Wisdom together with an inheritance is a good thing and an advantage to those who see the light of day.
For wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection, but the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.
Who is like the wise man? Who knows the solution to a problem? A man’s wisdom lights up his face and softens his stern appearance.
I say: “Obey the king’s orders out of regard for the oath to God.
Do not rush to depart from his presence. Do not take a stand for anything bad; for he can do whatever he pleases,
because the word of the king is absolute; who can say to him, ‘What are you doing?’”
The one who observes the commandment will not experience harm, and the wise heart will know the right time and procedure.
For every matter there is a time and procedure, because the troubles of mankind are so abundant.
Since no one knows what will happen, who can tell him how it will happen?
Just as no man has power over the spirit or can restrain the spirit, so no one has power over the day of death. Just as no one is discharged during a war, so wickedness will not allow those who practice it to escape.
All of this I have seen, and I applied my heart to every work that has been done under the sun, during the time that man has dominated man to his harm.
And I saw the wicked being buried, those who used to go in and out of the holy place, but they were soon forgotten in the city where they acted that way. This too is futility.
Because sentence against a bad deed has not been executed speedily, the heart of men becomes emboldened to do bad.
Although a sinner may do bad a hundred times and still live a long time, yet I am aware that it will turn out well for those who fear the true God, because they fear him.
So I took all of this to heart and concluded that the righteous and the wise, as well as their works, are in the hands of the true God. Men are not aware of the love and the hate that took place prior to them.
All have the very same outcome, the righteous and the wicked, the good and the clean and the unclean, those sacrificing and those not sacrificing. The good one is the same as the sinner; the one who swears an oath is the same as the one who is cautious about swearing an oath.
This is a distressing thing that happens under the sun: Because all have the same outcome, the heart of humans is also full of bad; and there is madness in their heart during their life, and then they die!
There is hope for whoever is among the living, because a live dog is better off than a dead lion.
For the living know that they will die, but the dead know nothing at all, nor do they have any more reward, because all memory of them is forgotten.
Also, their love and their hate and their jealousy have already perished, and they no longer have any share in what is done under the sun.
Go, eat your food with rejoicing, and drink your wine with a cheerful heart, for already the true God has found pleasure in your works.
May your clothing always be white, and do not fail to put oil on your head.
Enjoy life with your beloved wife all the days of your futile life, which He has given you under the sun, all the days of your futility, for that is your lot in life and in your hard work at which you toil under the sun.
Whatever your hand finds to do, do with all your might, for there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave, where you are going.
I have seen something further under the sun, that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events overtake them all.
For man does not know his time. Just as fish are caught in an evil net and birds are caught in a trap, so the sons of men are ensnared in a time of disaster, when it suddenly overtakes them.
As dead flies cause the perfumer’s oil to stink and bubble, so a little foolishness outweighs wisdom and glory.
The heart of the wise one leads him in the right way, but the heart of the stupid one leads him in the wrong way.
In whatever way the fool walks, he is lacking good sense, and he lets everyone know that he is a fool.
If the anger of a ruler should flare up against you, do not leave your place, for calmness allays great sins.
There is something distressing that I have seen under the sun, the sort of mistake made by those in power:
Foolishness is put in many high positions, but the rich remain in low positions.
I have seen servants on horseback but princes walking on foot just like servants.
The one who digs a pit may fall into it; and the one who breaks through a stone wall may be bitten by a snake.
The one who quarries stones may be hurt by them, and the one who splits logs may be endangered by them.
If an iron tool is dull and one does not sharpen its edge, he will need to exert much effort. But wisdom helps to achieve success.
If the snake bites before it is charmed, there is no advantage to the skilled charmer.
The words from the mouth of the wise one bring favor, but the lips of the stupid one are his ruin.
Cast your bread on the waters, for after many days you will find it again.
Give a share to seven or even to eight, for you do not know what disaster will occur on the earth.
If the clouds are filled with water, they will pour down rain on the earth; and if a tree falls to the south or to the north, the place where the tree falls is where it will lie.
The one who watches the wind will not sow seed, and the one who looks at the clouds will not reap.
Just as you do not know how the spirit operates in the bones of the child inside a pregnant woman, so you do not know the work of the true God, who does all things.
Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening; for you do not know which will have success, whether this one or that one, or whether they will both do well.
Light is sweet, and it is good for the eyes to see the sun.
For if a man should live many years, let him enjoy them all. But he should remember that the days of darkness may be many; all that is to come is futility.
Rejoice, young man, while you are young, and let your heart be glad in the days of your youth. Follow the ways of your heart and go where your eyes lead you; but know that the true God will bring you into judgment for all these things.
So remove troublesome things from your heart, and ward off harmful things from your body, for youth and the prime of life are futility.
Remember, then, your Grand Creator in the days of your youth, before the days of distress come and the years arrive when you will say: “I have no pleasure in them”;
before the sun and the light and the moon and the stars grow dark, and the clouds return after the downpour;
in the day when the guards of the house become shaky, and the strong men stoop over, and the women quit grinding because they have become few, and the ladies looking out the windows find it dark;
when the doors to the street have been closed, when the sound of the grinding mill becomes low, when one gets up at the sound of a bird, and all the daughters of song grow faint.
Also, one is afraid of heights, and there are terrors in the street. And the almond tree blossoms, and the grasshopper drags itself along, and the caper berry bursts, because man is walking to his lasting house and the mourners walk about in the street;
before the silver cord is removed, and the golden bowl is crushed, and the jar at the spring is broken, and the waterwheel for the cistern is crushed.
Then the dust returns to the earth, just as it was, and the spirit returns to the true God who gave it.
“The greatest futility!” says the congregator. “Everything is futile.”
Not only had the congregator become wise but he continually taught the people what he knew, and he pondered and made a thorough search in order to compile many proverbs.
The congregator sought to find delightful words and to record accurate words of truth.
The words of the wise are like oxgoads, and their collected sayings are like firmly embedded nails; they have been given from one shepherd.
As for anything besides these, my son, be warned: To the making of many books there is no end, and much devotion to them is wearisome to the flesh.
The song of songs, which is Solʹo·mon’s:
“May he kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,
The fragrance of your oils is pleasant.
Take me with you; let us run.
I am dark, but lovely, O daughters of Jerusalem,
Do not stare at me because I am swarthy,
Tell me, you whom I love so much,
“If you do not know, O most beautiful of women,
“I am but a saffron of the coastal plain,
“Like a lily among thorns
“Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest,
He brought me into the banquet house,
Refresh me with raisin cakes;
His left hand is under my head,
I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,
The sound of my dear one!
“Upon my bed during the nights,
I will arise and roam the city;
The watchmen making their rounds in the city found me.
Scarcely had I passed by them
I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,
“What is this coming up from the wilderness like columns of smoke,
“Look! It is the couch belonging to Solʹo·mon.
All of them armed with a sword,
“Look! You are beautiful, my beloved.
Your teeth are like a flock of newly shorn sheep
Your lips are like a scarlet thread,
Your neck is like the tower of David,
Your two breasts are like two fawns,
“Until the day grows breezy and the shadows flee,
“You are altogether beautiful, my beloved,
Come with me from Lebʹa·non, my bride,
“I have entered my garden,
“I am asleep, but my heart is awake.
I have taken off my robe.
My dear one withdrew his hand from the hole of the door,
I got up to open to my dear one;
I opened to my dear one,
The watchmen making their rounds in the city found me.
I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem:
“Where has your dear one gone,
“My dear one has gone down to his garden,
I am my dear one’s,
“You are as beautiful as Tirʹzah, my beloved,
Turn your eyes away from me,
Your teeth are like a flock of sheep
Like a segment of pomegranate
There may be  queens
“How beautiful your feet are in your sandals,
Your navel is a round bowl.
Your two breasts are like two fawns,
Your neck is like an ivory tower.
Your head crowns you like Carʹmel,
How beautiful you are, and how pleasant you are,
Your stature is like a palm tree,
I said, ‘I will climb the palm tree
“If only you were like my brother,
I would lead you;
His left hand would be under my head,
I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem:
“Who is this coming up from the wilderness,
Place me as a seal upon your heart,
Surging waters cannot extinguish love,
“We have a little sister,
The vision that Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uz·ziʹah, Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah:
Hear, O heavens, and pay attention, O earth,
A bull well knows its buyer,
Woe to the sinful nation,
Where will you be struck next as you add to your rebellion?
From the sole of the foot to the head, nothing is healthy.
Your land is desolate.
The daughter of Zion has been left like a shelter in a vineyard,
Unless Jehovah of armies had left us a few survivors,
Hear the word of Jehovah, you dictators of Sodʹom.
“Of what benefit to me are your many sacrifices?” says Jehovah.
When you come to appear before me,
Stop bringing in any more worthless grain offerings.
I have hated your new moons and your festivals.
And when you spread out your palms,
Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean;
Learn to do good, seek justice,
“Come, now, and let us set matters straight between us,” says Jehovah.
If you show willingness and listen,
But if you refuse and rebel,
How the faithful city has become a prostitute!
Your silver has become dross,
Your princes are stubborn and partners with thieves.
Therefore the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,
I will turn my hand against you,
I will restore your judges as in the beginning
With justice Zion will be redeemed,
The rebels and the sinners will be broken together,
For they will be ashamed of the mighty trees that you desired,
For you will become like a big tree with withering leaves,
The strong man will become tow,
This is what Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem:
In the final part of the days,
And many peoples will go and say:
He will render judgment among the nations
O house of Jacob, come,
For you have forsaken your people, the house of Jacob,
Their land is filled with silver and gold,
Their land is filled with worthless gods.
So man bows down, he becomes low,
Enter into the rock and hide yourself in the dust
The haughty eyes of man will be brought low,
For it is the day belonging to Jehovah of armies.
Upon all the cedars of Lebʹa·non that are lofty and exalted
Upon all the lofty mountains
Upon every high tower and every fortified wall,
Upon all the ships of Tarʹshish
Man’s haughtiness will be brought down,
The worthless gods will completely disappear.
And people will enter into the caves of the rocks
In that day men will take their worthless gods of silver and of gold
In order to enter into the holes in the rocks
For your own sakes, quit trusting in mere man,
For look! the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,
Mighty man and warrior,
Chief of , dignitary, and adviser,
I will make boys their princes,
The people will oppress one another,
Each one will take hold of his brother in his father’s house and say:
But he will protest in that day:
For Jerusalem has stumbled,
The expression of their faces testifies against them,
Tell the righteous that it will go well for them;
Woe to the wicked one!
As for my people, their taskmasters are abusive,
Jehovah is taking his position to accuse;
Jehovah will enter into judgment with the elders and princes of his people.
How dare you crush my people
Jehovah says: “Because the daughters of Zion are haughty,
Jehovah will also strike the head of the daughters of Zion with scabs,
In that day Jehovah will take away the beauty of their bangles,
The earrings, the bracelets, and the veils,
The headdresses, the ankle chains, and the breastbands,
The finger rings and the nose rings,
The ceremonial robes, the overtunics, the cloaks, and the purses,
The hand mirrors and the linen garments,
Instead of balsam oil, there will be a rotten smell;
By the sword your men will fall,
Her entrances will mourn and grieve,
And seven women will grab hold of one man in that day, saying:
In that day what Jehovah makes sprout will be splendid and glorious, and the fruitage of the land will be the pride and beauty of the survivors of Israel.
Whoever remains in Zion and is left over in Jerusalem will be called holy, all of those in Jerusalem written down for life.
When Jehovah washes away the filth of the daughters of Zion and rinses away the bloodshed of Jerusalem from her midst by the spirit of judgment and by a spirit of burning,
Jehovah will also create over the whole site of Mount Zion and over the place of her conventions a cloud and smoke by day and a bright flaming fire by night; for over all the glory there will be a shelter.
And there will be a booth for shade by day from the heat, and for refuge and protection from storms and the rain.
Let me sing, please, to my beloved
He dug it up and rid it of stones.
“And now, you inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah,
What more could I have done for my vineyard
Now, please, let me tell you
I will make it a wasteland;
For the vineyard of Jehovah of armies is the house of Israel;
Woe to those who join one house to another house
Jehovah of armies has sworn in my ears
For ten acres of vineyard will produce but one bath measure,
Woe to those who get up early in the morning to drink alcohol,
They have harp and stringed instrument,
So my people will go into exile
So the Grave has enlarged itself
And man will bow down,
Jehovah of armies will be exalted by his judgment;
And the lambs will graze as in their pasture;
Woe to those who drag along their guilt with ropes of deception
Those who say: “Let Him speed up his work;
Woe to those who say that good is bad and bad is good,
Woe to those wise in their own eyes
Woe to those who are mighty in drinking wine
Those who acquit the wicked for a bribe
Therefore, just as the tongue of fire consumes the stubble
That is why the anger of Jehovah burns against his people,
He has raised up a signal to a distant nation;
None among them are tired or stumbling.
All their arrows are sharp,
Their roaring is like that of a lion;
In that day they will growl over it
In the year that King Uz·ziʹah died, I saw Jehovah sitting on a lofty and elevated throne, and the skirts of his robe filled the temple.
Seraphs were standing above him; each had six wings. Each covered his face with two and covered his feet with two, and each of them would fly about with two.
And one called to the other:
And the pivots of the thresholds quivered at the sound of the shouting, and the house was filled with smoke.
Then I said: “Woe to me!
At that, one of the seraphs flew to me, and in his hand was a glowing coal that he had taken with tongs from the altar.
He touched my mouth and said:
Then I heard the voice of Jehovah saying: “Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?” And I said: “Here I am! Send me!”
And he replied, “Go, and say to this people:
Make the heart of this people unreceptive,
At this I said: “How long, O Jehovah?” Then he said:
Until Jehovah removes men far away
“But there will still be a tenth in it, and it will again be burned, like a big tree and like an oak, which after they are cut down leave a stump; a holy seed will be its stump.”
Now in the days of Aʹhaz son of Joʹtham son of Uz·ziʹah, the king of Judah, King Reʹzin of Syria and Peʹkah son of Rem·a·liʹah, the king of Israel, came up to wage war against Jerusalem, but he could not capture it.
A report was made to the house of David: “Syria has joined forces with Eʹphra·im.”
Jehovah then said to Isaiah: “Go out, please, to meet Aʹhaz, you and your son Sheʹar-jaʹshub, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool by the highway of the laundryman’s field.
You must say to him, ‘Take care to stay calm. Do not be afraid, and do not lose heart because of these two stumps of smoldering logs, because of the hot anger of Reʹzin and Syria and the son of Rem·a·liʹah.
For Syria with Eʹphra·im and the son of Rem·a·liʹah have plotted harm against you, saying:
“Let us go up against Judah and tear it apart and conquer it for ourselves, and let us appoint the son of Tabʹe·el as its king.”
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
For the head of Syria is Damascus,
The head of Eʹphra·im is Sa·marʹi·a,
Jehovah continued speaking to Aʹhaz:
“Ask for a sign from Jehovah your God; it may be as deep as the Grave or as high as the sky.”
But Aʹhaz said: “I will not ask, nor will I put Jehovah to the test.”
Isaiah then said: “Listen, please, O house of David. Is it not enough that you try the patience of men? Must you also try the patience of God?
Therefore, Jehovah himself will give you a sign: Look! The young woman will become pregnant and will give birth to a son, and she will name him Im·manʹu·el.
He will eat butter and honey by the time that he knows how to reject the bad and choose the good.
For before the boy knows how to reject the bad and choose the good, the land of the two kings whom you dread will be completely abandoned.
Jehovah will bring against you and against your people and against the house of your father a time such as has not come since the day Eʹphra·im broke away from Judah, for He will bring the king of As·syrʹi·a.
“In that day Jehovah will whistle for the flies from the distant streams of the Nile of Egypt and for the bees in the land of As·syrʹi·a,
and they will all come and settle down on the steep valleys, on the rocky clefts, on all the thornbushes, and on all the watering places.
“In that day by means of a hired razor from the region of the River, by means of the king of As·syrʹi·a, Jehovah will shave the head and the hair of the legs, and it will sweep away the beard as well.
“In that day a man will keep alive a young cow of the herd and two sheep.
And because of the abundance of milk, he will eat butter, for everyone remaining in the land will eat butter and honey.
“In that day wherever there used to be , vines worth , pieces of silver, there will be only thornbushes and weeds.
Men will go there with bow and arrow, because all the land will become thornbushes and weeds.
And all the mountains that used to be cleared with a hoe, you will not go near for fear of thornbushes and weeds; they will become a grazing place for bulls and a trampling ground of sheep.”
Jehovah said to me: “Take a large tablet and write on it with an ordinary stylus, ‘Maʹher-shalʹal-hash-baz.’
And let me have it confirmed in writing by faithful witnesses, U·riʹah the priest and Zech·a·riʹah the son of Je·ber·e·chiʹah.”
Then I had relations with the prophetess, and she became pregnant and in time gave birth to a son. Jehovah then said to me: “Name him Maʹher-shalʹal-hash-baz,
for before the boy knows how to call out, ‘My father!’ and ‘My mother!’ the resources of Damascus and the spoil of Sa·marʹi·a will be carried away before the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
Jehovah spoke to me again:
“Because this people has rejected the gently flowing waters of the Shi·loʹah
Therefore look! Jehovah will bring against them
And sweep through Judah.
Cause harm, you peoples, but you will be shattered to pieces.
Devise a plan, but it will be thwarted!
With his strong hand on me, this is what Jehovah said to me to warn me away from following the course of this people:
“You should not call a conspiracy what this people calls a conspiracy!
Jehovah of armies—he is the One you should regard as holy,
He will become as a sanctuary,
Many of them will stumble and fall and be broken;
Wrap up the written confirmation;
I will keep in expectation of Jehovah, who is hiding his face from the house of Jacob, and I will hope in him.
Look! I and the children whom Jehovah has given me are as signs and as miracles in Israel from Jehovah of armies, who resides on Mount Zion.
And if they say to you: “Inquire of the spirit mediums or of the fortune-tellers who chirp and mutter,” is it not of their God that a people should inquire? Should they inquire of the dead in behalf of the living?
Instead, they should inquire of the law and of the written confirmation!
And each one will pass through the land afflicted and hungry; and because he is hungry and indignant, he will curse his king and his God as he looks upward.
Then he will look to the earth and see only distress and darkness, obscurity and hard times, gloom and no brightness.
However, the gloom will not be as when the land had distress, as in former times when the land of Zebʹu·lun and the land of Naphʹta·li were treated with contempt. But at a later time He will cause it to be honored—the way by the sea, in the region of the Jordan, Galʹi·lee of the nations.
The people who were walking in the darkness
You have made the nation populous;
For you have shattered to pieces the yoke of their load,
Every boot that shakes the earth as it marches
For a child has been born to us,
To the increase of his rulership
Jehovah sent a word against Jacob,
And all the people will know it
“Bricks have fallen,
Jehovah will raise up Reʹzin’s adversaries against him
Syria from the east and the Phi·lisʹtines from the west,
For the people have not returned to the One who strikes them;
Jehovah will cut off from Israel
The elder and highly respected one is the head,
Those leading this people are causing them to wander,
That is why Jehovah will not rejoice over their young men,
For wickedness burns like a fire,
In the fury of Jehovah of armies
One will cut down on the right
Ma·nasʹseh will devour Eʹphra·im,
Woe to those who enact harmful regulations,
To deny the legal claim of the poor,
What will you do on the day of reckoning,
Nothing remains except to crouch among the prisoners
“Aha! the As·syrʹi·an,
I will send him against an apostate nation,
But he will not be inclined this way
For he says,
Is not Calʹno just like Carʹche·mish?
My hand has seized the kingdoms of the worthless gods,
Will I not also do to Jerusalem and her idols
“When Jehovah finishes all his work on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, He will punish the king of As·syrʹi·a for his insolent heart and his proud, arrogant gaze.
For he says,
Like a man reaching into a nest,
Will the ax exalt itself over the one who chops with it?
Therefore the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,
Israel’s Light will become a fire,
He will utterly do away with the glory of his forest and his orchard;
The rest of the trees of his forest
In that day those remaining of Israel
Only a remnant will return,
For though your people, O Israel,
Yes, the extermination decided on by the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, says: “Do not be afraid, my people who are dwelling in Zion, because of the As·syrʹi·an, who used to strike you with the rod and to lift up his staff against you as Egypt did.
For in a very little while the denunciation will come to an end; my anger will be directed to their destruction.
Jehovah of armies will brandish a whip against him, as when he defeated Midʹi·an by the rock Oʹreb. And his staff will be over the sea, and he will raise it as he did with Egypt.
In that day his load will depart from on your shoulder,
He has come to Aiʹath;
They have passed over the ford;
Cry out and scream, O daughter of Galʹlim!
Mad·meʹnah has run away.
This very day he will halt in Nob.
Look! The true Lord, Jehovah of armies,
He strikes down the thickets of the forest with an iron tool,
A twig will grow out of the stump of Jesʹse,
And the spirit of Jehovah will settle upon him,
And he will find delight in the fear of Jehovah.
He will judge the lowly with fairness,
Righteousness will be the belt around his waist,
The wolf will reside for a while with the lamb,
The cow and the bear will feed together,
The nursing child will play over the lair of a cobra,
They will not cause any harm
In that day the root of Jesʹse will stand up as a signal for the peoples.
In that day Jehovah will again offer his hand, a second time, to reclaim the remnant of his people who are left from As·syrʹi·a, from Egypt, from Pathʹros, from Cush, from Eʹlam, from Shiʹnar, from Haʹmath, and from the islands of the sea.
He will raise up a signal for the nations and gather the dispersed ones of Israel, and he will gather together the scattered ones of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
The jealousy of Eʹphra·im will be gone,
And they will swoop down on the slopes of the Phi·lisʹtines to the west;
Jehovah will divide the gulf of the Egyptian sea
And there will be a highway out of As·syrʹi·a for the remnant of his people who are left,
In that day you will certainly say:
Look! God is my salvation.
With rejoicing you will draw water
And in that day you will say:
Sing praises to Jehovah, for he has done magnificent things.
Cry out and shout for joy, you inhabitant of Zion,
A pronouncement against Babylon that Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw in vision:
“Raise up a signal on a mountain of bare rocks.
I have issued the command to those whom I have appointed.
Listen! A crowd in the mountains;
They are coming from a distant land,
Wail, for the day of Jehovah is near!
That is why all hands will go limp,
The people are panic-stricken.
Look! The day of Jehovah is coming,
For the stars of the heavens and their constellations
I will call the inhabited earth to account for its badness,
I will make mortal man scarcer than refined gold,
That is why I will make the heavens tremble,
Like a hunted gazelle and like a flock with no one to gather them,
Whoever is found will be pierced through,
Their children will be dashed to pieces before their eyes,
Here I am raising up against them the Medes,
Their bows will shatter young men;
And Babylon, the most glorious of kingdoms,
She will never be inhabited,
The desert creatures will lie down there;
Howling creatures will cry out in her towers,
For Jehovah will show mercy to Jacob, and he will again choose Israel. He will settle them in their land, and the foreign residents will join them and attach themselves to the house of Jacob.
And peoples will take them and bring them to their own place, and the house of Israel will possess them as male and female servants in Jehovah’s land; and they will be the captors of those who held them captive, and they will have in subjection those who were forcing them to work.
In the day when Jehovah gives you rest from your pain and from your turmoil and from the hard slavery imposed on you,
you will recite this proverb against the king of Babylon:
Jehovah has broken the rod of the wicked,
The one furiously striking peoples with unceasing blows,
The whole earth now rests, free of disturbance.
Even the juniper trees rejoice over you,
Even the Grave underneath is stirred up
All of them speak up and say to you,
Down to the Grave your pride has been brought,
How you have fallen from heaven,
You said in your heart, ‘I will ascend to the heavens.
I will go up above the tops of the clouds;
Instead, you will be brought down to the Grave,
Those seeing you will stare at you;
Who made the inhabited earth like the wilderness
All other kings of the nations,
But you are discarded without a grave,
You will not join them in a grave,
Prepare a slaughtering block for his sons
“I will rise up against them,” declares Jehovah of armies.
“And I will make her a possession of porcupines and a region of marshes, and I will sweep her with the broom of annihilation,” declares Jehovah of armies.
Jehovah of armies has sworn:
I will crush the As·syrʹi·an in my land,
This is what has been decided against all the earth,
For Jehovah of armies has decided,
In the year that King Aʹhaz died, this pronouncement was made:
“Do not rejoice, Phi·lisʹti·a, any of you,
While the firstborn of the lowly feed
Wail, O gate! Cry out, O city!
How should they answer the messengers of the nation?
A pronouncement against Moʹab:
He has gone up to the House and to Diʹbon,
In its streets they have put on sackcloth.
Heshʹbon and E·le·aʹleh cry out;
My heart cries out over Moʹab.
For the waters of Nimʹrim are desolate;
That is why they are carrying away what is left of their stores and their riches;
For the outcry echoes throughout the territory of Moʹab.
For the waters of Diʹmon are full of blood,
Send a ram to the ruler of the land,
Like a bird chased away from its nest,
“Offer counsel, carry out the decision.
May my dispersed ones reside in you, O Moʹab.
Then a throne will be firmly established in loyal love.
We have heard about the pride of Moʹab—he is very proud—
So Moʹab will wail for Moʹab;
For the terraces of Heshʹbon have withered,
That is why I will weep over the vine of Sibʹmah as I weep for Jaʹzer.
Rejoicing and joyfulness have been taken away from the orchard,
That is why deep within me I am boisterous over Moʹab,
Even when Moʹab wears himself out on the high place and goes to pray in his sanctuary, he will accomplish nothing.
This is the word that Jehovah previously spoke concerning Moʹab.
And now Jehovah says: “Within three years, like the years of a hired worker, the glory of Moʹab will be disgraced with much tumult of every sort, and those who remain will be very few and insignificant.”
A pronouncement against Damascus:
The cities of A·roʹer will be abandoned;
Fortified cities will disappear from Eʹphra·im,
“In that day the glory of Jacob will diminish,
It will be as when the harvester is gathering the standing grain
Only gleanings will be left,
In that day man will look up to his Maker, and his eyes will gaze at the Holy One of Israel.
He will not look to the altars, the work of his hands; and he will not gaze at what his fingers have made, either the sacred poles or the incense stands.
In that day his fortress cities will become like an abandoned site in the woodland,
For you have forgotten the God of your salvation;
In the day you carefully fence in your plantation,
Listen! There is a commotion of many peoples,
The nations will make a sound like the roar of many waters.
In the evening there is terror.
Woe to the land of whirring insect wings
It sends envoys by sea,
All you inhabitants of the land and you residents of the earth,
For this is what Jehovah said to me:
For before the harvest,
They will all be left for the birds of prey of the mountains
At that time a gift will be brought to Jehovah of armies,
A pronouncement against Egypt:
“I will incite Egyptians against Egyptians,
And the spirit of Egypt will become bewildered within it,
I will hand Egypt over to a hard master,
The water of the sea will be dried up,
And the rivers will stink;
The plants along the Nile River, at the mouth of the Nile,
And the fishermen will mourn,
Those who work in combed flax
Her weavers will be crushed;
The princes of Zoʹan are foolish.
Where, then, are your wise men?
The princes of Zoʹan have acted foolishly;
Jehovah has poured out on her a spirit of confusion;
And Egypt will not have any work to do,
In that day Egypt will become like women, trembling and terrified because of the threatening hand that Jehovah of armies raises against it.
And the land of Judah will become a cause for terror to Egypt. They will feel dread at the mention of it because of the decision that Jehovah of armies has made against them.
In that day there will be five cities in the land of Egypt speaking the language of Caʹnaan and swearing loyalty to Jehovah of armies. One city will be called The City of Tearing Down.
In that day there will be an altar to Jehovah in the middle of the land of Egypt and a pillar to Jehovah at its boundary.
It will be for a sign and for a witness to Jehovah of armies in the land of Egypt; for they will cry out to Jehovah because of the oppressors, and he will send them a savior, a grand one, who will save them.
And Jehovah will become known to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians will know Jehovah in that day, and they will offer sacrifices and gifts and make a vow to Jehovah and pay it.
Jehovah will strike Egypt, striking and healing it; and they will return to Jehovah, and he will respond to their entreaties and heal them.
In that day there will be a highway out of Egypt to As·syrʹi·a. Then As·syrʹi·a will come into Egypt, and Egypt into As·syrʹi·a, and Egypt will serve God together with As·syrʹi·a.
In that day Israel will be the third along with Egypt and with As·syrʹi·a, a blessing in the midst of the earth,
for Jehovah of armies will have blessed it, saying: “Blessed be my people, Egypt, and the work of my hands, As·syrʹi·a, and my inheritance, Israel.”
In the year that King Sarʹgon of As·syrʹi·a sent the Tarʹtan to Ashʹdod, he fought against Ashʹdod and captured it.
At that time Jehovah spoke through Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz, saying: “Go, remove the sackcloth from your hips, and take your sandals off your feet.” And he did so, walking about naked and barefoot.
Jehovah then said: “Just as my servant Isaiah has walked about naked and barefoot for three years as a sign and a portent against Egypt and E·thi·oʹpi·a,
so the king of As·syrʹi·a will lead the captives of Egypt and the exiles of E·thi·oʹpi·a, boys and old men, naked and barefoot and with exposed buttocks, the nakedness of Egypt.
And they will be terrified and will be ashamed of E·thi·oʹpi·a their hope and of Egypt their pride.
The inhabitants of this coastland will say in that day, ‘Look at what happened to our hope, to which we fled for help and rescue from the king of As·syrʹi·a! How will we escape now?’”
A pronouncement against the wilderness of the sea:
A harsh vision has been told to me:
That is why I am in great anguish.
My heart falters; I shudder in terror.
Set the table and arrange the seats!
For this is what Jehovah said to me:
And he saw a war chariot with a team of horses,
Then he called out like a lion:
Look at what is coming:
O my people who have been threshed,
A pronouncement against Duʹmah:
The watchman said:
A pronouncement against the desert plain:
Bring water to meet the thirsty one,
For they have fled from the swords, from the drawn sword,
For this is what Jehovah said to me: “Within one year, like the years of a hired worker, all the glory of Keʹdar will come to an end.
The remaining bowmen of the warriors of Keʹdar will be few, for Jehovah the God of Israel has spoken.”
A pronouncement about the Valley of Vision:
You were full of turmoil,
All your dictators have fled together.
That is why I said: “Turn your eyes away from me,
For it is a day of confusion and of defeat and of panic,
Eʹlam picks up the quiver
Your choicest valleys
And the screen of Judah will be removed.
and you will see the many breaches of the City of David. And you will collect the waters of the lower pool.
You will count the houses of Jerusalem, and you will pull down the houses to reinforce the wall.
And you will make a basin between the two walls for the water of the old pool, but you will not look to its Grand Maker, and you will not see the One who formed it long ago.
In that day the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,
But instead, there is celebration and rejoicing,
Then Jehovah of armies revealed himself in my ears: “‘This error will not be atoned in your behalf until you people die,’ says the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.”
This is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, says: “Go in to this steward, to Shebʹna, who is in charge of the house, and say,
‘What is your interest here, and who is there of interest to you here, that you hewed out a burial place here for yourself?’ He is hewing out his burial place in a high place; he is cutting out a resting-place for himself in a crag.
‘Look! Jehovah will hurl you down violently, O man, and seize you forcibly.
He will certainly wrap you up tightly and hurl you like a ball into a wide land. There you will die, and there your glorious chariots will be, a disgrace to your master’s house.
And I will depose you from your position and throw you out of your office.
“‘In that day I will call my servant E·liʹa·kim the son of Hil·kiʹah,
and I will clothe him with your robe and firmly bind your sash around him, and I will give your authority into his hand. And he will be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah.
And I will put the key of the house of David on his shoulder. He will open and no one will shut; and he will shut and no one will open.
I will drive him in as a peg in a lasting place, and he will become as a throne of glory to the house of his father.
And they will hang on him all the glory of the house of his father, the descendants and the offspring, all the small vessels, the bowl-shaped vessels, as well as all the large jars.
“‘In that day,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘the peg that is driven in a lasting place will be removed, and it will be cut down and fall, and the load that it supported will fall to ruin, for Jehovah himself has spoken.’”
A pronouncement about Tyre:
Be silent, you inhabitants of the coastland.
Over many waters went the grain of Shiʹhor,
Be ashamed, O Siʹdon, you stronghold of the sea,
As when they heard the report about Egypt,
Cross over to Tarʹshish!
Is this your city that was exultant from long ago, from her early times?
Who has decided this against Tyre,
Jehovah of armies himself has decided this,
Cross over your land like the Nile River, O daughter of Tarʹshish.
He has stretched his hand out over the sea;
And he says: “You will exult no more,
Look! The land of the Chal·deʹans.
Wail, you ships of Tarʹshish,
In that day Tyre will be forgotten for  years, the same as the lifetime of one king. At the end of  years, it will happen to Tyre as in the song of a prostitute:
“Take a harp, go around the city, O forgotten prostitute.
At the end of  years, Jehovah will turn his attention to Tyre, and she will return to her hire and prostitute herself with all the world’s kingdoms on the face of the earth.
But her profit and her hire will become something holy to Jehovah. It will not be stored or laid away, because her hire will be for those dwelling before Jehovah, so that they may eat to satisfaction and wear elegant clothing.
Look! Jehovah is emptying the land and making it desolate.
It will be the same for everyone:
The land will be completely emptied;
The land mourns; it is wasting away.
The land has been polluted by its inhabitants,
That is why the curse devours the land,
The new wine mourns, the vine withers,
The joy of the tambourines has ceased;
They drink wine without song,
The deserted town is broken down;
They cry out for wine in the streets.
The city is left in ruins;
For this is how it will be in the land, among the peoples:
They will raise their voice,
That is why they will glorify Jehovah in the region of light;
From the ends of the earth we hear songs:
Terror and pits and traps await you, inhabitant of the land.
Anyone fleeing from the sound of terror will fall into the pit,
The land has burst apart;
The land staggers like a drunken man,
In that day Jehovah will turn his attention to the army of the heights above
And they will be gathered together
The full moon will be abashed,
O Jehovah, you are my God.
For you have turned a city into a pile of stones,
That is why a strong people will glorify you;
For you have become a stronghold to the lowly,
As the heat in a parched land,
In this mountain Jehovah of armies will make for all the peoples
In this mountain he will do away with the shroud that is enveloping all the peoples
He will swallow up death forever,
In that day they will say:
For the hand of Jehovah will rest on this mountain,
He will slap out his hands into it
And the fortified city, with your high walls of security,
In that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah:
Open up the gates so that the righteous nation may enter,
You will safeguard those who fully lean on you;
Trust in Jehovah forever,
For he has brought low those inhabiting the height, the lofty city.
The foot will trample it,
The path of the righteous one is upright.
As we follow the path of your judgments, O Jehovah,
In the night I long for you with my whole being,
Even if the wicked is shown favor,
O Jehovah, your hand is raised, but they do not see it.
O Jehovah, you will grant us peace,
O Jehovah our God, other masters besides you have ruled over us,
They are dead; they will not live.
You have enlarged the nation, O Jehovah,
O Jehovah, during distress they turned to you;
Just as a pregnant woman about to give birth
We became pregnant, we had labor pains,
“Your dead will live.
Go, my people, enter your inner rooms,
For look! Jehovah is coming from his place
In that day Jehovah, with his harsh and great and strong sword,
In that day sing to her:
I, Jehovah, am safeguarding her.
There is no wrath in me.
Otherwise, let him hold fast to my stronghold.
In the coming days Jacob will take root,
Must he be struck with the stroke of the one striking him?
With a startling cry you will contend with her when sending her away.
So in this way the error of Jacob will be atoned for,
For the fortified city will be deserted;
When her twigs have dried up,
In that day Jehovah will beat out the fruit from the flowing stream of the River to the Wadi of Egypt, and you will be gathered up one after the other, O people of Israel.
In that day a great horn will be blown, and those who are perishing in the land of As·syrʹi·a and those dispersed in the land of Egypt will come and bow down to Jehovah in the holy mountain in Jerusalem.
Woe to the showy crown of the drunkards of Eʹphra·im
Look! Jehovah has someone strong and mighty.
The showy crowns of the drunkards of Eʹphra·im
And the fading flower of its glorious beauty,
In that day Jehovah of armies will become a glorious crown and a beautiful garland to those left of his people.
And he will become a spirit of justice to the one who sits in judgment and a source of mightiness to those who repel the attack at the gate.
And these also go astray because of wine;
For their tables are full of filthy vomit
To whom will one impart knowledge,
For it is “command after command, command after command,
So by means of those with stammering speech and a foreign language, he will speak to this people.
He once told them: “This is the resting-place. Let the weary one rest; this is the place of refreshment,” but they refused to listen.
So to them the word of Jehovah will be:
So hear the word of Jehovah, you boasters,
For you men say:
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
And I will make justice the measuring line
Your covenant with Death will be dissolved,
As often as it passes through,
For the bed is too short to stretch out on,
For Jehovah will rise up as at Mount Pe·raʹzim;
Now do not scoff,
Give ear and listen to my voice;
Does the plower keep plowing all day before he sows seed?
When he has smoothed out its surface,
For He teaches him the right way;
For black cumin is not crushed with a threshing sledge,
Does a person crush grain for bread?
This also comes from Jehovah of armies,
“Woe to Arʹi·el, Arʹi·el, the city where David encamped!
But I will bring distress on Arʹi·el,
I will encamp on all sides against you,
You will be brought low;
The crowd of your enemies will be like fine powder,
Jehovah of armies will give you his attention
Then the crowd of all the nations waging war against Arʹi·el
Yes, it will be just as when someone hungry dreams that he is eating,
Be stunned and amazed;
For Jehovah has poured a spirit of deep sleep on you;
Every vision becomes for you like the words of a sealed book. When they give it to someone who can read, saying: “Read this out loud, please,” he will say: “I cannot, for it is sealed up.”
And when they give the book to someone who cannot read, saying: “Read this, please,” he will say: “I cannot read at all.”
Jehovah says: “This people approach me with their mouth
Therefore, I am the One who will again do wonderful things with this people,
Woe to those who go to great lengths to conceal their plans from Jehovah.
How you twist things!
In just a short time, Lebʹa·non will be turned into an orchard,
In that day the deaf will hear the words of the book,
The meek will rejoice greatly in Jehovah,
For the tyrant will be no more,
Those who with a false word make others guilty,
So this is what Jehovah, who redeemed Abraham, says to the house of Jacob:
For when he sees his children,
Those who are wayward in spirit will acquire understanding,
“Woe to the stubborn sons,” declares Jehovah,
They go down to Egypt without consulting me,
But the protection of Pharʹaoh will become for you a reason for shame,
For his princes are in Zoʹan,
They will all be put to shame
A pronouncement against the beasts of the south:
For Egypt’s help is completely useless.
“Now go, write it on a tablet in their presence,
For they are a rebellious people, deceitful sons,
They say to the seers, ‘Do not see,’
Turn aside from the way; deviate from the path.
Therefore this is what the Holy One of Israel says:
So this error will be for you like a broken wall,
It will be broken like a large potter’s jar,
For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, says:
Instead, you said: “No, we will flee on horses!”
A thousand will tremble at the threat of one;
But Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor,
When the people dwell in Zion, in Jerusalem, you will by no means weep. He will surely show you favor at the sound of your cry for help; he will answer you as soon as he hears it.
Though Jehovah will give you bread in the form of distress and water in the form of oppression, your Grand Instructor will no longer hide himself, and you will see your Grand Instructor with your own eyes.
And your own ears will hear a word behind you saying, “This is the way. Walk in it,” in case you should go to the right or in case you should go to the left.
And you will defile the silver overlay of your graven images and the golden plating of your metal statues. You will cast them away like a menstrual cloth and say to them, “Be gone!”
And he will give the rain for the seed you sow in the ground, and the bread that the ground produces will be abundant and rich. In that day your livestock will graze in spacious pastures.
And the cattle and the donkeys that work the ground will eat fodder seasoned with sorrel, which was winnowed with the shovel and the pitchfork.
And on every tall mountain and on every high hill will be streams and watercourses, in the day of the great slaughter when the towers fall.
And the light of the full moon will become like the light of the sun; and the light of the sun will become seven times stronger, like the light of seven days, in the day that Jehovah binds up the breakdown of his people and heals the severe wound from the blow he inflicted.
Look! The name of Jehovah is coming from far away,
His spirit is like a flooding torrent that reaches clear to the neck,
But your song will be like the one sung in the night
Jehovah will make his majestic voice heard
For because of the voice of Jehovah, As·syrʹi·a will be struck with terror;
And every swing of his rod of punishment
For his Toʹpheth is already prepared;
Woe to those who go down to Egypt for assistance,
But he is also wise and will bring calamity,
The Egyptians, though, are mere men and not God;
For this is what Jehovah has said to me:
Like swooping birds, so Jehovah of armies will defend Jerusalem.
“Return to the One against whom you have blatantly revolted, O people of Israel.
For in that day each one will reject his worthless gods of silver and his valueless gods of gold, which your own hands sinfully made.
And the As·syrʹi·an will fall by the sword, not of a man;
His crag will pass away because of sheer fright,
Look! A king will reign for righteousness,
And each one will be like a hiding place from the wind,
Then the eyes of those seeing will no longer be pasted shut,
The heart of those who are impetuous will ponder over knowledge,
The senseless one will no longer be called generous,
For the senseless one will speak nonsense,
The devices of the unprincipled man are bad;
But the generous one has generous intentions,
“You complacent women, get up and listen to my voice!
In a little over a year, you who are carefree will shudder,
Tremble, you complacent women!
Beat your breasts in lamentation
For the ground of my people will be covered with thorns and briars;
For the fortified tower has been forsaken;
Until the spirit is poured out on us from above,
Then justice will reside in the wilderness,
The result of true righteousness will be peace,
My people will dwell in a peaceful abiding place,
But the hail will flatten the forest,
Happy are you who sow seed alongside all waters,
Woe to you, you destroyer who has not been destroyed;
O Jehovah, show us favor.
At the sound of turmoil peoples flee.
As the voracious locusts gather, so your spoil will be gathered;
Jehovah will be exalted,
He is the stability of your times;
Look! Their heroes cry out in the street;
The highways are deserted;
The land mourns and withers away.
“Now I will rise up,” says Jehovah,
You conceive dried grass and give birth to stubble.
And peoples will become as the burnings of lime.
You who are far away, listen to what I will do!
The sinners in Zion are in dread;
The one who walks in continual righteousness,
—He will reside in the heights;
Your eyes will behold a king in his splendor;
In your heart you will recall the terror:
You will no more see the insolent people,
Behold Zion, the city of our festivals!
But there the Majestic One, Jehovah,
For Jehovah is our Judge,
Your ropes will hang loose;
And no resident will say: “I am sick.”
Come close to hear, you nations,
For Jehovah’s indignation is against all the nations,
Their slain will be thrown out,
All the army of the heavens will rot away,
“For in the heavens my sword will be drenched.
Jehovah has a sword; it will be covered with blood.
The wild bulls will go down with them,
For Jehovah has a day of vengeance,
Her streams will be changed into pitch,
By night or by day it will not be extinguished;
The pelican and the porcupine will possess her,
None of her nobles will be called to the kingship,
Thorns will grow in her fortified towers,
Desert creatures will meet up with howling animals,
There the arrow snake will make its nest and lay eggs,
Search in the book of Jehovah and read it out loud:
He is the One who has cast the lot for them,
The wilderness and the parched land will exult,
Without fail it will blossom;
Strengthen the weak hands,
Say to those who are anxious at heart:
At that time the eyes of the blind will be opened,
At that time the lame will leap like the deer,
The heat-parched ground will become a reedy pool,
And a highway will be there,
No lion will be there,
Those redeemed by Jehovah will return and come to Zion with a joyful cry.
In the th year of King Hez·e·kiʹah, Sen·nachʹer·ib the king of As·syrʹi·a came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them.
The king of As·syrʹi·a then sent the Rabʹsha·keh with a vast army from Laʹchish to King Hez·e·kiʹah in Jerusalem. They took up a position by the conduit of the upper pool, which is at the highway of the laundryman’s field.
Then E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came out to him.
So the Rabʹsha·keh said to them: “Please, say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a, says: “What is the basis for your confidence?
You are saying, ‘I have a strategy and the power to wage war,’ but these are empty words. In whom have you put trust, so that you dare to rebel against me?
Look! You trust in the support of this crushed reed, Egypt, which if a man should lean on it would enter into his palm and pierce it. That is the way Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is to all those who trust in him.
And if you should say to me, ‘We trust in Jehovah our God,’ is he not the one whose high places and altars Hez·e·kiʹah has removed, while he says to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You should bow down before this altar’?”’
So now make this wager, please, with my lord the king of As·syrʹi·a: I will give you , horses if you are able to find enough riders for them.
How, then, could you drive back even one governor who is the least of my lord’s servants, while you put your trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
Now is it without authorization from Jehovah that I have come up against this land to destroy it? Jehovah himself said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”
At this E·liʹa·kim and Shebʹna and Joʹah said to the Rabʹsha·keh: “Speak to your servants, please, in the Ar·a·maʹic language, for we can understand it; do not speak to us in the language of the Jews in the hearing of the people on the wall.”
But the Rabʹsha·keh said: “Is it just to your lord and to you that my lord sent me to speak these words? Is it not also to the men who sit on the wall, those who will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you?”
Then the Rabʹsha·keh stood and called out loudly in the language of the Jews, saying: “Hear the word of the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a.
This is what the king says, ‘Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you, for he is not able to rescue you.
And do not let Hez·e·kiʹah cause you to trust in Jehovah by saying: “Jehovah will surely rescue us, and this city will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
Do not listen to Hez·e·kiʹah, for this is what the king of As·syrʹi·a says: “Make peace with me and surrender, and each of you will eat from his own vine and from his own fig tree and will drink the water of his own cistern,
until I come and take you to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah mislead you by saying, ‘Jehovah will rescue us.’ Have any of the gods of the nations rescued their land out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a?
Where are the gods of Haʹmath and Arʹpad? Where are the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim? And have they rescued Sa·marʹi·a out of my hand?
Who among all the gods of these lands have rescued their land out of my hand, so that Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem out of my hand?”’”
But they kept silent and did not say a word to him in reply, for the order of the king was, “You must not answer him.”
But E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came to Hez·e·kiʹah with their garments ripped apart and told him the words of the Rabʹsha·keh.
As soon as King Hez·e·kiʹah heard this, he ripped his garments apart and covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of Jehovah.
Then he sent E·liʹa·kim, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah, the son of Aʹmoz.
They said to him: “This is what Hez·e·kiʹah says, ‘This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; for the children are ready to be born, but there is no strength to give birth.
Perhaps Jehovah your God will hear the words of the Rabʹsha·keh, whom the king of As·syrʹi·a his lord sent to taunt the living God, and he will call him to account for the words that Jehovah your God has heard. So offer up a prayer in behalf of the remnant who have survived.’”
So the servants of King Hez·e·kiʹah went in to Isaiah,
and Isaiah said to them: “This is what you should say to your lord, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Do not be afraid because of the words that you heard, the words with which the attendants of the king of As·syrʹi·a blasphemed me.
Here I am putting a thought in his mind, and he will hear a report and return to his own land; and I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”
After the Rabʹsha·keh heard that the king of As·syrʹi·a had pulled away from Laʹchish, he returned to him and found him fighting against Libʹnah.
Now the king heard it said about King Tir·haʹkah of E·thi·oʹpi·a: “He has come out to fight against you.” When he heard this, he sent messengers again to Hez·e·kiʹah, saying:
“This is what you should say to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you by saying: “Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
Look! You have heard what the kings of As·syrʹi·a did to all the lands by devoting them to destruction. Will you alone be rescued?
Did the gods of the nations that my forefathers destroyed rescue them? Where are Goʹzan, Haʹran, Reʹzeph, and the people of Eʹden who were in Tel-asʹsar?
Where is the king of Haʹmath, the king of Arʹpad, and the king of the cities of Seph·ar·vaʹim, and of Heʹna, and of Ivʹvah?’”
Hez·e·kiʹah took the letters out of the hand of the messengers and read them. Hez·e·kiʹah then went up to the house of Jehovah and spread them out before Jehovah.
And Hez·e·kiʹah began to pray to Jehovah and say:
“O Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, sitting enthroned above the cherubs, you alone are the true God of all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth.
Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and hear! Open your eyes, O Jehovah, and see! Hear all the words that Sen·nachʹer·ib has sent to taunt the living God.
It is a fact, O Jehovah, that the kings of As·syrʹi·a have devastated all the lands, as well as their own land.
And they have thrown their gods into the fire, because they were not gods but the work of human hands, wood and stone. That is why they could destroy them.
But now, O Jehovah our God, save us out of his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone are God, O Jehovah.”
Isaiah son of Aʹmoz then sent this message to Hez·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Because you prayed to me concerning King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a,
this is the word that Jehovah has spoken against him:
Whom have you taunted and blasphemed?
Through your servants you have taunted Jehovah and said,
I will dig wells and drink waters;
Have you not heard? From long ago it was determined.
Their inhabitants will be helpless;
But I well know when you sit, when you go out, when you come in,
Because your rage against me and your roaring have reached my ears.
“‘And this will be the sign for you: This year you will eat what grows on its own; and in the second year, you will eat grain that sprouts from that; but in the third year you will sow seed and reap, and you will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.
Those of the house of Judah who escape, those who are left, will take root downward and produce fruit upward.
For a remnant will go out of Jerusalem and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.
“‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says about the king of As·syrʹi·a:
‘By the way he came he will return;
‘I will defend this city and save it for my own sake
And the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down , men in the camp of the As·syrʹi·ans. When people rose up early in the morning, they saw all the dead bodies.
So King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a departed and returned to Ninʹe·veh and stayed there.
And as he was bowing down at the house of his god Nisʹroch, his own sons A·dramʹme·lech and Shar·eʹzer struck him down with the sword and then escaped to the land of Arʹa·rat. And his son Eʹsar-hadʹdon became king in his place.
In those days Hez·e·kiʹah became sick and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz came and said to him, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Give instructions to your household, for you will die; you will not recover.’”
At that Hez·e·kiʹah turned his face to the wall and began to pray to Jehovah:
“I beg you, O Jehovah, remember, please, how I have walked before you faithfully and with a complete heart, and I have done what was good in your eyes.” And Hez·e·kiʹah began to weep profusely.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Isaiah, saying:
“Go back and say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of David your forefather says: “I have heard your prayer. I have seen your tears. Here I am adding  years to your life,
and I will rescue you and this city out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a, and I will defend this city.
This is the sign from Jehovah to show you that Jehovah will carry out the word that he has spoken:
Here I will make the declining shadow of the sun on the stairway of Aʹhaz go back ten steps.”’” So the sun went back ten steps on the stairway that it had already descended.
A writing of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah when he became sick and recovered from his sickness.
I said: “In the middle of my life
I said: “I will not see Jah, Jah in the land of the living.
My own dwelling has been pulled out and removed from me
I calm myself until the morning.
Like the swift or the thrush, so I keep chirping;
What can I say?
‘O Jehovah, by these things every man lives,
Look! Instead of peace, I had great bitterness;
For the Grave cannot glorify you,
The living, the living can praise you,
O Jehovah, save me,
Isaiah then said: “Bring a cake of pressed dried figs and apply it to the boil, so that he may recover.”
Hez·e·kiʹah had asked: “What is the sign that I will go up to the house of Jehovah?”
At that time the king of Babylon, Merʹo·dach-balʹa·dan son of Balʹa·dan, sent letters and a gift to Hez·e·kiʹah, for he had heard that he had been sick and had recovered.
Hez·e·kiʹah gladly welcomed them and showed them his treasure-house—the silver, the gold, the balsam oil and other precious oil, his whole armory, and everything that was to be found in his treasuries. There was nothing that Hez·e·kiʹah did not show them in his own house and in all his dominion.
After that Isaiah the prophet came in to King Hez·e·kiʹah and asked him: “What did these men say, and where did they come from?” So Hez·e·kiʹah said: “They came from a distant land, from Babylon.”
Next he asked: “What did they see in your house?” Hez·e·kiʹah replied: “They saw everything in my house. There was nothing that I did not show them in my treasuries.”
Isaiah now said to Hez·e·kiʹah: “Hear the word of Jehovah of armies,
‘Look! Days are coming, and all that is in your house and all that your forefathers have stored up to this day will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left,’ says Jehovah.
‘And some of your own sons to whom you will become father will be taken and will become court officials in the palace of the king of Babylon.’”
At that Hez·e·kiʹah said to Isaiah: “The word of Jehovah that you have spoken is good.” Then he added: “Because there will be peace and stability during my lifetime.”
“Comfort, comfort my people,” says your God.
“Speak to the heart of Jerusalem,
A voice of one calling out in the wilderness:
Let every valley be raised up,
The glory of Jehovah will be revealed,
Listen! Someone is saying: “Call out!”
The green grass dries up,
The green grass dries up,
Go up onto a high mountain,
Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will come with power,
Like a shepherd he will care for his flock.
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand
Who has taken the measurements of the spirit of Jehovah,
With whom did he consult to gain understanding,
Look! The nations are like a drop from a bucket,
Even Lebʹa·non is not sufficient to keep a fire burning,
All the nations are as something nonexistent in front of him;
To whom can you compare God?
The craftsman casts an idol,
He chooses a tree for his contribution,
Do you not know?
There is One who dwells above the circle of the earth,
He reduces high officials to nothing
They are hardly planted,
“To whom can you liken me to make me his equal?” says the Holy One.
“Lift up your eyes to heaven and see.
Why do you say, O Jacob, and why do you declare, O Israel,
Do you not know? Have you not heard?
He gives power to the tired one
Boys will tire out and grow weary,
But those hoping in Jehovah will regain power.
“Listen to me in silence, you islands;
Who has raised up someone from the sunrise,
He pursues them, passing along unhindered
Who has acted and done this,
The islands have seen it and have become afraid.
Each one helps his companion
So the craftsman strengthens the metalworker;
“But you, O Israel, are my servant,
You, whom I took from the ends of the earth,
Do not be afraid, for I am with you.
Look! All those getting enraged against you will be put to shame and humiliated.
You will search for men who struggle with you, but you will not find them;
For I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand,
Do not be afraid, you worm Jacob,
“Look! I have made you a threshing sledge,
You will winnow them,
“The needy and the poor are seeking water, but there is none.
I will make rivers flow on the bare hills
In the desert I will plant the cedar tree,
So that all people may see and know
“Present your case,” says Jehovah.
“Produce evidence and tell us the things that will happen.
Tell us what will happen in the future,
Look! You are something nonexistent,
I have raised up someone from the north, and he will come,
Who told about this from the beginning, so that we could know,
I was the first to say to Zion: “Look! Here they are!”
But I kept looking, and there was no one;
Look! All of them are a delusion.
Look! My servant, whom I support!
He will not cry out or raise his voice,
No crushed reed will he break,
He will not grow dim or be crushed until he establishes justice in the earth;
This is what the true God, Jehovah, says,
“I, Jehovah, have called you in righteousness;
For you to open the blind eyes,
I am Jehovah. That is my name;
See, the first things have come to pass;
Sing to Jehovah a new song,
Let the wilderness and its cities raise their voice,
Let them attribute glory to Jehovah
Jehovah will go out like a mighty man.
“I have kept quiet for a long time.
I will devastate mountains and hills
I will lead the blind in a way that they do not know
They will be turned back and will be utterly put to shame,
Listen, you who are deaf;
Who is blind except my servant,
You see many things, but you do not keep watch.
For the sake of his righteousness,
But this is a people plundered and pillaged;
Who among you will hear this?
Who has given Jacob for pillage
So He kept pouring out on him wrath,
Now this is what Jehovah says,
When you pass through the waters, I will be with you,
For I am Jehovah your God,
For you became precious in my eyes,
Do not be afraid, for I am with you.
I will say to the north, ‘Give them up!’
Everyone who is called by my name
Bring out a people who are blind, though they have eyes,
Let all the nations assemble in one place,
“You are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah,
I—I am Jehovah, and besides me there is no savior.”
“I am the One who declared and saved and made known
Also, I am always the same One;
This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel:
I am Jehovah, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.”
This is what Jehovah says,
The One who draws out the war chariot and the horse,
“Do not remember the former things,
Look! I am doing something new;
The wild beast of the field will honor me,
The people whom I formed for myself
But you have not called on me, O Jacob,
You have not brought me sheep for your whole burnt offerings
You did not buy me sweet cane with your money,
I, I am the One who is blotting out your transgressions for my own sake,
Remind me; let us bring our case against each other;
Your first forefather sinned,
So I will profane the princes of the holy place,
“Now listen, O Jacob my servant,
This is what Jehovah says,
For I will pour out water on the thirsty one
And they will spring up as among the green grass,
One will say: “I belong to Jehovah.”
This is what Jehovah says,
Who is there like me?
Do not be in dread,
All who form carved images amount to nothing,
Who would form a god or cast a metal image
Look! All his associates will be put to shame!
The metalsmith works the iron over the coals with his tool.
The wood-carver stretches the measuring line, tracing out the pattern with red chalk.
There is one whose work is to cut down cedars.
Then it becomes fuel for a man to make fires.
Half of it he burns up in a fire;
But the rest of it he makes into a god, into his carved image.
They know nothing, they understand nothing,
No one reflects in his heart
He feeds on ashes.
“Remember these things, O Jacob, and you, O Israel,
I will blot out your transgressions as with a cloud
Shout joyfully, you heavens,
This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser,
I am frustrating the signs of the empty talkers,
The One making the word of his servant come true
The One saying to the deep waters, ‘Be evaporated,
The One saying of Cyrus, ‘He is my shepherd,
This is what Jehovah says to his anointed one, to Cyrus,
“Before you I will go,
I will give you the treasures in the darkness
For the sake of my servant Jacob and of Israel my chosen one,
I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.
In order that people may know
I form light and create darkness,
You heavens, rain down from above;
Woe to the one who contends with his Maker,
Woe to the one who says to a father: “What do you become father to?”
This is what Jehovah says, the Holy One of Israel, the One who formed him:
I made the earth and created man on it.
“I have raised up a man in righteousness,
This is what Jehovah says:
Truly you are a God who conceals himself,
They will all be put to shame and be humiliated;
But Israel will be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting salvation.
For this is what Jehovah says,
I did not speak in a concealed place, in a land of darkness;
Gather together and come.
Make your report, present your case.
Turn to me and be saved, all the ends of the earth,
By myself I have sworn;
And say, ‘Surely in Jehovah are true righteousness and strength.
In Jehovah all the offspring of Israel will prove to be right,
Bel bends down, Neʹbo stoops over.
They stoop and bend down together;
“Listen to me, O house of Jacob, and all you who remain of the house of Israel,
Until you grow old I will be the same;
To whom will you liken me or make me equal or compare me,
There are those who lavish gold from their purse;
They lift it to their shoulders;
Remember this, and take courage.
Remember the former things of long ago,
From the beginning I foretell the outcome,
I am calling a bird of prey from the sunrise,
Listen to me, you who are stubborn of heart,
I have brought my righteousness near;
Come down and sit in the dust,
Take a hand mill and grind flour.
Your nakedness will be uncovered.
“The One repurchasing us
Sit there silently and go into darkness,
I grew indignant at my people.
You said: “I will always be the Mistress, forever.”
Now hear this, O lover of pleasure,
But these two things will come upon you suddenly, in one day:
You trusted in your wickedness.
But calamity will come upon you,
Go ahead, then, with your spells and your many sorceries,
You have grown weary with the multitude of your advisers.
Look! They are like stubble.
So your charmers will become to you,
Hear this, O house of Jacob,
For they call themselves after the holy city
“The former things I told you long ago.
Because I knew how stubborn you are
I told you long ago.
You have heard and seen all of this.
Only now are they being created, and not long ago,
No, you have not heard, you have not known,
But for the sake of my name I will hold back my anger;
Look! I have refined you, but not in the form of silver.
For my own sake, for my own sake I will act,
Listen to me, O Jacob, and Israel, whom I have called.
My own hand laid the foundation of the earth,
Gather together, all of you, and listen.
I myself have spoken, and I have called him.
Come near to me, and hear this.
This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel:
If only you would pay attention to my commandments!
Your offspring would be as many as the sand
Go out from Babylon!
They did not become thirsty when he led them through devastated places.
“There is no peace,” says Jehovah, “for the wicked.”
Listen to me, you islands,
He made my mouth like a sharp sword;
He said to me: “You are my servant, O Israel,
But I said: “I have toiled for nothing.
And now Jehovah, the One who formed me from the womb as his servant,
And he said: “It is not enough that you are my servant
This is what Jehovah, the Repurchaser of Israel, his Holy One, says to the one who is despised, to the one who is detested by the nation, to the servant of rulers:
This is what Jehovah says:
To say to the prisoners, ‘Come out!’
They will not go hungry, nor will they thirst,
I will make all my mountains into a road,
Look! These are coming from far away,
Shout for joy, you heavens, and rejoice, you earth.
But Zion kept saying:
Can a woman forget her nursing child
Look! On my palms I have engraved you.
Your sons hurry back.
Raise your eyes and look all around.
Although your places were devastated and desolate and your land was in ruins,
The sons born when you were bereaved will say in your hearing,
And you will say in your heart,
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
Kings will become caretakers for you,
Can those already captured be taken from a mighty man,
But this is what Jehovah says:
I will make those who mistreat you eat their own flesh,
This is what Jehovah says:
Why, then, was no one here when I came?
I clothe the heavens with gloom,
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has given me the tongue of those taught,
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has opened my ear,
I offered my back to those striking me
But the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will help me.
The One who declares me righteous is near.
Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will help me.
Who among you fears Jehovah
“Look! All of you who are igniting a fire,
“Listen to me, you who are pursuing righteousness,
Look to Abraham your father
For Jehovah will comfort Zion.
Pay attention to me, O my people,
My righteousness draws near.
Raise your eyes to the heavens,
Listen to me, you who know righteousness,
For a moth will eat them up just like a garment;
Awake! Awake! Clothe yourself with strength,
Are you not the one who dried up the sea, the waters of the vast deep?
The redeemed ones of Jehovah will return.
“I myself am the One comforting you.
Why do you forget Jehovah your Maker,
The one bent over in chains will soon be set free;
But I am Jehovah your God,
I will put my words in your mouth,
Awake! Awake! Rise up, O Jerusalem,
Not one of all the sons whom she bore is there to guide her,
These two things have befallen you.
Your sons have fainted.
So please listen to this,
This is what your Lord Jehovah says, your God who defends his people:
I will put it into the hand of your tormentors,
Awake! Awake! Clothe yourself with strength, O Zion!
Shake off the dust, rise and take a seat, O Jerusalem.
For this is what Jehovah says:
For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
“What, then, should I do here?” declares Jehovah.
For that reason my people will know my name;
How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of the one bringing good news,
Listen! Your watchmen raise their voice.
Become cheerful, shout joyfully in unison, you ruins of Jerusalem,
Jehovah has bared his holy arm before the eyes of all the nations;
Turn away, turn away, get out of there, touch nothing unclean!
For you will not depart in panic,
Look! My servant will act with insight.
Just as there were many who stared at him in amazement
So he will startle many nations.
Who has put faith in the thing heard from us?
He will come up like a twig before him, like a root out of parched land.
He was despised and was avoided by men,
Truly he himself carried our sicknesses,
But he was pierced for our transgression;
Like sheep we have all wandered about,
He was oppressed and he let himself be afflicted,
Because of restraint and judgment he was taken away;
And he was given a burial place with the wicked,
But it was Jehovah’s will to crush him, and he let him become sick.
Because of his anguish, he will see and be satisfied.
For that reason I will assign him a portion among the many,
“Shout joyfully, you barren woman who has not given birth!
“Make the place of your tent more spacious.
For you will spread out to the right and to the left.
Do not be afraid, for you will not be put to shame;
“For your Grand Maker is as your husband,
For Jehovah called you as if you were an abandoned wife and grief-stricken,
“For a brief moment I abandoned you,
In a flood of indignation I hid my face from you for a moment,
“This is like the days of Noah to me.
For the mountains may be removed
“O afflicted woman, storm-tossed, uncomforted,
I will make your battlements of rubies,
And all your sons will be taught by Jehovah,
You will be firmly established in righteousness.
If anyone should attack you,
“Look! I myself created the craftsman,
No weapon formed against you will have any success,
Come, all you thirsty ones, come to the water!
Why do you keep paying out money for what is not bread,
Incline your ear and come to me.
Look! I made him a witness to the nations,
Look! You will call a nation that you do not know,
Search for Jehovah while he may be found.
Let the wicked man leave his way
“For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
“For as the heavens are higher than the earth,
For just as the rain and the snow pour down from heaven
So my word that goes out of my mouth will be.
For you will go out with rejoicing,
Instead of thornbushes the juniper tree will grow,
This is what Jehovah says:
Happy is the man who does this
The foreigner who joins himself to Jehovah should not say,
For this is what Jehovah says to the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths and who choose what I delight in and who hold fast to my covenant:
“I will give to them in my house and within my walls a monument and a name,
As for the foreigners who join themselves to Jehovah to minister to him,
I will also bring them to my holy mountain
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah, who is gathering the dispersed ones of Israel, declares:
All you wild animals of the field, come to eat,
His watchmen are blind, none of them have taken note.
They are dogs with a voracious appetite;
“Come, let me take some wine,
The righteous one has perished,
He enters into peace.
“But as for you, come closer,
Whom are you making fun of?
Those who are inflamed with passion among big trees,
With the smooth stones of the valley is your portion.
On a mountain high and lofty you prepared your bed,
Behind the door and the doorpost you set up your memorial.
You went down to Melʹech with oil
You have toiled in following your many ways,
Whom did you dread and fear
I will make known your ‘righteousness’ and your works,
When you cry for help,
It will be said, ‘Build up, build up a road! Prepare the way!
For this is what the High and Lofty One says,
For I will not oppose them forever
I was indignant at his sinful pursuit of dishonest gain,
I have seen his ways,
“I am creating the fruit of the lips.
“But the wicked are like the restless sea that cannot calm down,
There is no peace,” says my God, “for the wicked.”
“Call out full-throated; do not hold back!
They seek me day after day,
‘Why do you not see when we fast?
Your fasting ends in quarrels and fights,
Should the fast that I choose be like this,
No, this is the fast that I choose:
It is to share your bread with the hungry,
Then your light will shine through like the dawn,
Then you will call, and Jehovah will answer;
If you grant to the hungry what you yourself desire
Jehovah will always lead you
They will rebuild ancient ruins on your account,
If because of the Sabbath you refrain from pursuing your own interests on my holy day
Then you will find your exquisite delight in Jehovah,
Look! The hand of Jehovah is not too short to save,
No, your own errors have separated you from your God.
For your palms are polluted with blood
No one calls out for righteousness,
They hatch the eggs of a poisonous snake,
Their cobweb will not serve as a garment,
Their feet run to do evil,
They have not known the way of peace,
That is why justice is far away from us,
We grope for the wall like blind men;
We all keep growling like bears
For our revolts are many before you;
We have transgressed and denied Jehovah;
Justice is driven back,
Truth has vanished,
He saw that there was no man,
Then he put on righteousness like a coat of mail
He will reward them for what they have done:
From the sunset they will fear the name of Jehovah
“To Zion the Repurchaser will come,
“As for me, this is my covenant with them,” says Jehovah. “My spirit that is on you and my words that I have placed in your mouth—they will not be removed from your mouth, from the mouth of your children, or from the mouth of your grandchildren,” says Jehovah, “from now on and forever.”
“Arise, O woman, shed light, for your light has come.
For look! darkness will cover the earth
Nations will go to your light
Raise your eyes and look all around you!
At that time you will see and become radiant,
Throngs of camels will cover your land,
All the flocks of Keʹdar will be gathered to you.
Who are these that fly along like clouds,
For in me the islands will hope;
Foreigners will build your walls,
Your gates will be kept open constantly;
For any nation and any kingdom that will not serve you will perish,
To you the glory of Lebʹa·non will come,
The sons of those who oppressed you will come and bow down before you;
Instead of your being abandoned and hated, with nobody passing through,
And you will actually drink the milk of nations,
Instead of the copper I will bring in gold,
No more will violence be heard in your land
For you the sun will no longer be a light by day,
No more will your sun set,
And all your people will be righteous;
The little one will become a thousand
The spirit of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is upon me,
To proclaim the year of Jehovah’s goodwill
To provide for those mourning over Zion,
They will rebuild the ancient ruins;
“Strangers will stand and shepherd your flocks,
As for you, you will be called the priests of Jehovah;
Instead of shame you will have a double portion,
For I, Jehovah, love justice;
Their offspring will be known among the nations
I will greatly exult in Jehovah.
For as the earth brings forth its sprouts
For the sake of Zion I will not keep silent,
“The nations will see your righteousness, O woman,
You will become a crown of beauty in the hand of Jehovah,
No more will you be called an abandoned woman,
For just as a young man marries a virgin,
Upon your walls, O Jerusalem, I have commissioned watchmen.
And do not give him any rest until he firmly establishes Jerusalem,
Jehovah has sworn an oath with his right hand, with his strong arm:
But those gathering it will eat it and they will praise Jehovah;
Pass through, pass through the gates.
Look! Jehovah has proclaimed to the ends of the earth:
They will be called the holy people, those repurchased by Jehovah,
Who is this coming from Eʹdom,
Why is your clothing red,
“I have trodden the wine trough alone.
For the day of vengeance is in my heart,
I looked, but there was no one to help;
I trampled peoples in my anger,
I will mention Jehovah’s acts of loyal love,
For he said: “Surely they are my people, sons who will not be disloyal.”
During all their distress it was distressing to him.
But they rebelled and grieved his holy spirit.
And they remembered the days of old,
The One who made His glorious arm go with the right hand of Moses,
The One who made them walk through the surging waters,
Just like livestock when they go down into the valley plain,
Look down from heaven and see
For you are our Father;
Why do you, O Jehovah, let us wander from your ways?
Your holy people possessed it for a short time.
For too long we have become like those you never ruled over,
If only you had ripped the heavens apart and come down,
As when a fire ignites the brushwood,
When you did awe-inspiring things that we dared not hope for,
From of old no one has heard or given ear,
You have met up with those who joyfully do what is right,
And we have all become like someone unclean,
There is no one calling on your name,
But now, O Jehovah, you are our Father.
Do not become too indignant, O Jehovah,
Your holy cities have become a wilderness.
Our house of holiness and glory,
In view of this, will you still restrain yourself, O Jehovah?
“I have let myself be searched for by those who did not ask for me;
I have spread out my hands all day long to a stubborn people,
A people who constantly offend me to my face,
They sit among graves,
They say, ‘Keep to yourself; do not approach me,
Look! It is written before me;
For their errors and for the errors of their forefathers as well,” says Jehovah.
This is what Jehovah says:
I will bring out of Jacob an offspring
Sharʹon will become a pasture for sheep
But you are among those forsaking Jehovah,
So I will destine you for the sword,
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
Look! My servants will shout joyfully because of the good condition of the heart,
You will leave behind a name that my chosen ones will use as a curse,
So that anyone who seeks a blessing for himself in the earth
For look! I am creating new heavens and a new earth;
So exult and be joyful forever in what I am creating.
And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and exult in my people;
“No more will there be an infant from that place who lives but a few days,
They will build houses and live in them,
They will not build for someone else to inhabit,
They will not toil for nothing,
Even before they call out, I will answer;
The wolf and the lamb will feed together,
This is what Jehovah says:
“My own hand has made all these things,
The one slaughtering the bull is like one striking down a man.
So I will choose ways to punish them,
Hear the word of Jehovah, you who tremble at his word:
There is a sound of uproar from the city, a sound from the temple!
Before she went into labor, she gave birth.
Who has ever heard of such a thing?
“Will I bring it to the point of birth and then not bring it forth?” says Jehovah.
Rejoice with Jerusalem and be joyful with her, all you who love her.
For you will nurse and be fully satisfied from her breast of consolation,
For this is what Jehovah says:
As a mother comforts her son,
You will see this, and your heart will rejoice,
“For Jehovah will come as a fire,
For with fire Jehovah will execute judgment,
“Those sanctifying themselves and cleansing themselves to enter the gardens following one who is in the center, those eating the flesh of pigs and loathsome things and mice, they will all come to their end together,” declares Jehovah.
“Since I know about their works and their thoughts, I am coming to gather people of all nations and languages, and they will come and see my glory.”
“I will set a sign among them, and I will send some of those who escape to the nations—to Tarʹshish, Pul, and Lud, those who draw the bow, to Tuʹbal and Jaʹvan, and to the faraway islands—who have not heard a report about me or seen my glory; and they will proclaim my glory among the nations.
They will bring all your brothers out of all the nations as a gift to Jehovah, on horses, in chariots, in covered wagons, on mules, and on swift camels, up to my holy mountain, Jerusalem,” says Jehovah, “just as when the people of Israel bring their gift in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah.”
“I will also take some for the priests and for the Levites,” says Jehovah.
“For just as the new heavens and the new earth that I am making will remain standing before me,” declares Jehovah, “so your offspring and your name will remain.”
“And from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath,
“And they will go out and look on the carcasses of the men who rebelled against me;
These are the words of Jeremiah the son of Hil·kiʹah, one of the priests in Anʹa·thoth in the land of Benjamin.
The word of Jehovah came to him in the days of Jo·siʹah the son of Aʹmon, the king of Judah, in the th year of his reign.
It came also in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim the son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, until the completion of the th year of Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, until Jerusalem went into exile in the fifth month.
The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Before I formed you in the womb I knew you,
But I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah!
Jehovah then said to me:
Do not be afraid because of their appearance,
Then Jehovah stretched out his hand and touched my mouth. And Jehovah said to me: “I have put my words in your mouth.
See, I have commissioned you this day to be over the nations and over the kingdoms, to uproot and to pull down, to destroy and to tear down, to build and to plant.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying: “What do you see, Jeremiah?” So I said: “I see the branch of an almond tree.”
Jehovah said to me: “You have seen correctly, for I am wide awake concerning my word to carry it out.”
The word of Jehovah came to me a second time, saying: “What do you see?” So I said: “I see a boiling pot, and its mouth is tilted away from the north.”
Then Jehovah said to me:
For ‘I am summoning all the families of the kingdoms of the north,’ declares Jehovah,
And I will declare my judgments against them over all their wickedness,
But you should prepare for action,
For today I have made you a fortified city,
And they will certainly fight against you,
The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Go and proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem, ‘This is what Jehovah says:
Israel was holy to Jehovah, the firstfruits of his harvest.”’
Hear the word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob,
This is what Jehovah says:
They did not ask, ‘Where is Jehovah,
I then brought you to a land of orchards,
The priests did not ask, ‘Where is Jehovah?’
‘So I will contend further with you,’ declares Jehovah,
‘But cross over to the coastlands of the Kitʹtim and see.
Has a nation ever changed its gods for those that are not gods?
Stare in amazement at this, you heavens;
‘Because my people have done two bad things:
‘Is Israel a servant or a slave born in the household?
Against him young lions roar;
The people of Noph and Tahʹpan·es feed on the crown of your head.
Have you not brought this on yourself
Now why do you wish for the way to Egypt
Your wickedness should correct you,
‘For long ago I smashed your yoke
I planted you as a choice red vine, all of it pure seed;
‘Though you should wash with soda and use much lye,
How can you say, ‘I have not defiled myself.
A wild donkey accustomed to the wilderness,
Keep your feet from going bare
Like the shame of a thief when he is caught,
They say to a tree, ‘You are my father,’
Now where are your gods that you made for yourself?
‘Why do you keep contending against me?
I have struck your sons in vain.
O generation, consider for yourselves the word of Jehovah.
Can a virgin forget her ornaments,
How skillfully, O woman, you set your course to seek love!
Even your skirts are stained with the blood of the innocent poor ones,
But you say, ‘I am innocent.
Why do you treat so lightly your unstable course?
For this reason also you will go out with your hands on your head,
People ask: “If a man sends his wife away and she leaves him and becomes another man’s, should he return to her anymore?”
“Raise your eyes to the bare hills and see.
So showers of rain are withheld,
But now you call out to me,
Should one stay resentful forever,
In the days of King Jo·siʹah, Jehovah said to me: “‘Have you seen what unfaithful Israel has done? She has gone up on every high mountain and underneath every luxuriant tree to commit prostitution.
Even after she did all these things, I kept telling her to return to me, but she did not return; and Judah kept watching her treacherous sister.
When I saw that, I sent unfaithful Israel away with a full certificate of divorce because of her adultery. But her treacherous sister Judah did not become afraid; she too went out and committed prostitution.
She took her prostitution lightly, and she kept polluting the land and committing adultery with stones and with trees.
Despite all this, her treacherous sister Judah did not return to me with all her heart, only in pretense,’ declares Jehovah.”
Jehovah then said to me: “Unfaithful Israel has shown herself to be more righteous than treacherous Judah.
Go and proclaim these words to the north:
Only acknowledge your guilt, for you have rebelled against Jehovah your God. You continued scattering your favors to strangers under every luxuriant tree, but you would not obey my voice,” declares Jehovah.’”
“Return, you renegade sons,” declares Jehovah. “For I have become your true master; and I will take you, one from a city and two from a family, and I will bring you to Zion.
And I will give you shepherds after my own heart, and they will feed you with knowledge and insight.
You will become many and will bear fruit in the land in those days,” declares Jehovah. “No more will they say, ‘The ark of the covenant of Jehovah!’ It will not come up into the heart, nor will they remember it or miss it, and it will not be made again.
At that time they will call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah; and all the nations will be brought together to the name of Jehovah at Jerusalem, and they will no longer stubbornly follow their own wicked heart.”
“In those days they will walk together, the house of Judah alongside the house of Israel, and together they will come from the land of the north into the land that I gave to your forefathers as an inheritance.
And I thought, ‘How I placed you among the sons and gave you the desirable land, the most beautiful inheritance among the nations!’ I also thought that you would call me, ‘My Father!’ and that you would not turn away from following me.
‘Truly as a wife treacherously leaves her husband, so also you, O house of Israel, have dealt treacherously with me,’ declares Jehovah.”
On the bare hills a sound is heard,
“Return, you renegade sons.
Truly the hills and the turmoil on the mountains are a delusion.
But the shameful thing has consumed the toil of our forefathers since our youth,
Let us lie down in our shame,
“If you will return, O Israel,” declares Jehovah,
And if you swear,
For this is what Jehovah says to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem:
Circumcise yourselves to Jehovah,
Declare it in Judah, and proclaim it in Jerusalem.
Raise a signal toward Zion.
He has emerged like a lion from his thicket;
Therefore, put on sackcloth,
“In that day,” declares Jehovah, “the heart of the king will fail him,
Then I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Truly you have utterly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, ‘You will have peace,’ when the sword is at our throats.”
At that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem:
The full wind comes from these places at my bidding.
Look! He will come like rain clouds,
Wash your heart clean of wickedness, O Jerusalem, in order to be saved.
For a voice tells the news from Dan,
Report it, yes, to the nations;
They come against her on all sides like guards of the open field,
“Your own ways and your actions will be brought upon you.
O my anguish, my anguish!
Disaster after disaster has been reported,
How long will I keep seeing the signal,
“For my people are foolish;
I saw the land, and look! it was empty and desolate.
I saw the mountains, and look! they were quaking,
I saw, and look! there was no man,
I saw, and look! the orchard had become a wilderness,
For this is what Jehovah says: “The whole land will become desolate,
For this reason the land will mourn,
At the sound of the horsemen and the archers,
Now that you are devastated, what will you do?
For I have heard the sound like that of a sick woman,
Roam the streets of Jerusalem.
Even if they say: “As surely as Jehovah is alive!”
O Jehovah, do your eyes not look for faithfulness?
But I said to myself: “Surely these must be the lowly.
I will go to the prominent men and speak with them,
That is why a lion of the forest attacks them,
How can I forgive you for this?
They are like eager, lustful horses,
“Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah.
“Come up against her vineyard terraces and bring ruin,
For the house of Israel and the house of Judah
“They have denied Jehovah, and they keep saying,
The prophets are full of wind,
Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, says:
“Here I am bringing in on you a nation from far away, O house of Israel,” declares Jehovah.
Their quiver is like an open grave;
They will devour your harvest and your bread.
“But even in those days,” declares Jehovah, “I will not carry out a complete extermination of you.
And when they ask, ‘Why has Jehovah our God done all these things to us?’ you should answer them, ‘Just as you abandoned me to serve a foreign god in your land, so you will serve foreigners in a land that is not yours.’”
Declare this in the house of Jacob,
“Hear this, you foolish and senseless people:
‘Do you not fear me?’ declares Jehovah,
But this people has a stubborn and rebellious heart;
And they do not say in their heart:
Your own errors have prevented these things from coming;
For among my people there are wicked men.
Like a cage full of birds,
They have grown fat and smooth;
“Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah.
Something appalling and horrible has occurred in the land:
The prophets prophesy lies,
Take shelter, O sons of Benjamin, away from Jerusalem.
The daughter of Zion resembles a beautiful and delicate woman.
The shepherds and their droves will come.
“Prepare for war against her!
“Rise up, and let us attack during the night
For this is what Jehovah of armies says:
As a cistern keeps its water cool,
Be warned, O Jerusalem, or I will turn away from you in disgust;
This is what Jehovah of armies says:
“To whom should I speak and give warning?
So I am filled with the wrath of Jehovah,
Their houses will be turned over to others,
“For from the least to the greatest, each one is making dishonest gain;
And they try to heal the breakdown of my people lightly, saying,
Do they feel ashamed of the detestable things they have done?
This is what Jehovah says:
“And I appointed watchmen who said,
“Therefore hear, O nations!
Listen, O earth!
“What do I care that you bring frankincense from Sheʹba
Therefore this is what Jehovah says:
This is what Jehovah says:
They will grab hold of the bow and the javelin.
We have heard the report about it.
Do not go out into the field,
O daughter of my people,
“I have made you a metal tester among my people,
All of them are the most stubborn men,
The bellows have been scorched.
Rejected silver is what people will certainly call them,
This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“Stand in the gate of the house of Jehovah and proclaim there this message, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, all you people of Judah who enter these gates to bow down to Jehovah.
This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Reform your ways and your actions, and I will allow you to keep residing in this place.
Do not put your trust in deceptive words and say, ‘This is the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah!’
For if you truly reform your ways and actions; if you truly uphold justice between a man and his neighbor;
if you do not oppress foreign residents, orphans, and widows; if you do not shed innocent blood in this place; and if you do not follow other gods to your own harm;
then I will allow you to keep residing in this place, in the land I gave to your forefathers for all time.”’”
“But you are putting your trust in deceptive words—it will bring absolutely no benefit.
Can you steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, make sacrifices to Baʹal, and follow after gods you had not known,
and then come and stand before me in this house that bears my name and say, ‘We will be saved,’ despite your doing all these detestable things?
Has this house that bears my name become a cave of robbers in your eyes? Here I have seen it for myself,” declares Jehovah.
“‘However, go now to my place in Shiʹloh, where I first caused my name to reside, and see what I did to it because of the badness of my people Israel.
But you kept doing all these things,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and even though I spoke to you again and again, you did not listen. I kept calling you, but you would not answer.
So I will do to the house that bears my name, in which you are trusting, and to this place that I gave to you and your forefathers, just as I did to Shiʹloh.
I will throw you out of my sight, just as I threw out all your brothers, all the descendants of Eʹphra·im.’
“As for you, do not pray in behalf of this people. Do not cry out or offer a prayer or plead with me in their behalf, for I will not listen to you.
Do you not see what they are doing in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
The sons are gathering wood, the fathers are lighting the fire, and the wives are kneading dough in order to make sacrificial cakes to the Queen of Heaven, and they are pouring out drink offerings to other gods to offend me.
‘But am I the one they are hurting?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Is it not they themselves, to their own shame?’
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘Look! My anger and my wrath will be poured out on this place, on man and beast, on the trees of the field and the fruitage of the ground; it will burn and will not be extinguished.’
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go ahead, add your whole burnt offerings to your other sacrifices, and eat the flesh yourselves.
For on the day I brought your forefathers out of the land of Egypt, I did not speak with them or command them concerning whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
But I did give them this command: “Obey my voice, and I will become your God, and you will become my people. You must walk in all the way that I command, so that it may go well with you.”’
But they did not listen or incline their ear; instead, they walked in their own schemes, stubbornly following their wicked heart, and they went backward, not forward,
from the day your forefathers came out of the land of Egypt until this day. So I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them each day, again and again.
But they refused to listen to me, and they did not incline their ear. Instead, they were stubborn, and they acted worse than their forefathers!
“You will speak all these words to them, but they will not listen to you; you will call to them, but they will not answer you.
And you will say to them, ‘This is the nation that did not obey the voice of Jehovah their God and refused to accept discipline. Faithfulness has perished and is not even mentioned among them.’
“Shear off your uncut hair and throw it away, and on the bare hills raise a dirge, for Jehovah has rejected and will abandon this generation that has infuriated him.
‘For the people of Judah have done what is bad in my eyes,’ declares Jehovah. ‘They have set up their disgusting idols in the house that bears my name, in order to defile it.
They have built the high places of Toʹpheth, which is in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, in order to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire, something that I had not commanded and that had never even come into my heart.’
“‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when it will no longer be called Toʹpheth or the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom but the Valley of the Slaughter. They will bury in Toʹpheth until there is no place left.
And the dead bodies of this people will become food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth, with no one to frighten them away.
I will put an end to the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, for the land will be reduced to ruins.’”
“At that time,” declares Jehovah, “the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of its princes, the bones of the priests, the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem will be taken from their graves.
They will be spread out to the sun and to the moon and to all the army of the heavens that they loved and served and followed and sought after and bowed down to. They will not be gathered, nor will they be buried. They will become like manure on the surface of the ground.”
“And the remnant of this evil family who survive will choose death over life in all the places where I disperse them,” declares Jehovah of armies.
“And you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says:
Why is this people, Jerusalem, unfaithful with an enduring unfaithfulness?
I paid attention and kept listening, but the way they spoke was not right.
Even the stork in the sky knows its seasons;
‘How can you say: “We are wise, and we have the law of Jehovah”?
The wise have been put to shame.
So I will give their wives to other men,
And they try to heal the breakdown of the daughter of my people lightly, saying,
Do they feel ashamed of the detestable things they have done?
‘When I gather them, I will bring them to their end,’ declares Jehovah.
“Why are we sitting here?
There was a hope for peace, but nothing good came,
From Dan is heard the snorting of his horses.
“For here I am sending in serpents among you,
My grief is incurable;
From a distant land there is a cry for help
“The harvest has passed, the summer has ended,
I am shattered over the breakdown of the daughter of my people;
Is there no balsam in Gilʹe·ad?
O that my head were waters,
O that I had a traveler’s lodging place in the wilderness!
They bend their tongue like a bow;
“Everyone, be on guard against your neighbor,
Each one cheats his neighbor,
You are living in the midst of deception.
Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says:
Their tongue is a deadly arrow that speaks deception.
“Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah.
I will weep and lament over the mountains
I will make Jerusalem piles of stones, the lair of jackals,
Who is wise enough to understand this?
Jehovah replied: “Because of their rejecting my law that I set before them, and because they have not followed it and obeyed my voice.
Instead, they stubbornly followed their own hearts, and they followed the Baʹal images, as their fathers had taught them to do.
Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am making this people eat wormwood, and I will make them drink poisoned water.
I will scatter them among the nations that they and their fathers have not known, and I will send a sword after them until I will have exterminated them.’
This is what Jehovah of armies says,
So that they may hurry and raise a lamentation for us,
For the sound of lamentation has been heard from Zion:
You women, hear the word of Jehovah.
For death has come up through our windows;
Say, ‘This is what Jehovah declares:
This is what Jehovah says:
“But let the one boasting boast about this:
“Look! Days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “and I will hold an accounting with everyone circumcised and yet uncircumcised,
with Egypt and Judah and Eʹdom and the Amʹmon·ites and Moʹab and with all of those with hair clipped at the temples who are dwelling in the wilderness; for all the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.”
Hear the word that Jehovah has spoken against you, O house of Israel.
This is what Jehovah says:
For the customs of the peoples are a delusion.
They adorn it with silver and gold
Like a scarecrow in a cucumber field, they cannot speak;
No one is like you, O Jehovah.
Who should not fear you, O King of the nations, for it is fitting;
They are all unreasoning and stupid.
Silver plates are imported from Tarʹshish and gold from Uʹphaz,
But Jehovah is truly God.
This is what you should say to them:
He is the Maker of the earth by his power,
When he makes his voice heard,
Every man acts unreasonably and without knowledge.
They are a delusion, a work of mockery.
The Share of Jacob is not like these things,
Gather up your bundle from the ground,
For this is what Jehovah says:
Woe to me because of my breakdown!
My tent has been devastated, and my tent cords have all been torn apart.
For the shepherds have behaved senselessly,
Listen! A report! It is coming!
I well know, O Jehovah, that man’s way does not belong to him.
Correct me, O Jehovah, with judgment,
Pour out your wrath on the nations who ignore you
This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“Hear the words of this covenant, you people!
and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Cursed is the man who does not obey the words of this covenant,
which I commanded your forefathers on the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron-smelting furnace, saying, ‘Obey my voice, and do all the things that I command you; and you will become my people and I will be your God,
so that I may fulfill the oath that I swore to your forefathers, to give them the land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day.’”’”
Jehovah then said to me: “Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem: ‘Hear the words of this covenant, and carry them out.
For I solemnly admonished your forefathers in the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt and to this day, admonishing them again and again: “Obey my voice.”
But they did not listen or incline their ear; instead, each kept stubbornly following his own wicked heart. So I brought on them all the words of this covenant that I commanded them to do and that they refused to carry out.’”
Jehovah then said to me: “There is a conspiracy among the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They have returned to the errors of their forefathers of old, who refused to obey my words. They too have followed other gods and have served them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant that I made with their forefathers.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am bringing on them a calamity that they will not be able to escape. When they call to me for help, I will not listen to them.
Then the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem will go to the gods to which they are making sacrifices and call for help, but these will by no means save them in the time of their calamity.
For your gods have become as many as your cities, O Judah, and you have set up as many altars to the shameful thing as there are streets in Jerusalem, altars to make sacrifices to Baʹal.’
“As for you, do not pray in behalf of this people. Do not cry out in their behalf or offer a prayer for them, for I will not be listening when they call out to me because of their calamity.
What right does my beloved one have to be in my house
Jehovah once called you a thriving olive tree,
“Jehovah of armies, your Planter, has declared that a calamity will come upon you because of the evil committed by the house of Israel and the house of Judah, who have offended me by making sacrifices to Baʹal.”
Jehovah informed me so that I would know;
I was like a docile lamb being brought to the slaughter.
But Jehovah of armies judges with righteousness;
Therefore this is what Jehovah says against the men of Anʹa·thoth who are seeking to take your life and who say: “You must not prophesy in the name of Jehovah, or you will die by our hand”;
therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here I am going to call them to account. The young men will die by the sword, and their sons and their daughters will die by famine.
Not even a remnant will be left of them, because I will bring calamity on the men of Anʹa·thoth in the year of their being called to account.”
You are righteous, O Jehovah, when I make my complaint to you,
You planted them, and they have taken root.
But you know me well, O Jehovah, you see me;
How much longer should the land wither away
If you get tired running with footmen,
For even your own brothers, the household of your own father,
“I have abandoned my house; I have deserted my inheritance.
My inheritance has become to me like a lion in the forest.
My inheritance is like a multicolored bird of prey to me;
Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard;
It has become a wasteland.
On all the worn paths through the wilderness the destroyers have come,
They have sown wheat, but they have reaped thorns.
This is what Jehovah says against all my wicked neighbors, who are touching the inheritance that I caused my people Israel to possess: “Here I am uprooting them from their land, and I will uproot the house of Judah from among them.
But after I uproot them, I will again have mercy on them and bring each of them back to his inheritance and to his land.”
“And if they make sure to learn the ways of my people and to swear by my name, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’ just as they taught my people to swear by Baʹal, they will then be built up among my people.
But if they refuse to obey, I will also uproot that nation, uprooting and destroying it,” declares Jehovah.
This is what Jehovah told me: “Go and buy a linen belt for yourself and put it around your waist, but do not dip it in water.”
So I bought the belt according to the word of Jehovah and put it around my waist.
And the word of Jehovah came to me a second time:
“Take the belt that you bought and are wearing and get up, go to the Eu·phraʹtes, and hide it there in a cleft of the crag.”
So I went and hid it by the Eu·phraʹtes, just as Jehovah had commanded me.
But many days later Jehovah said to me: “Get up, go to the Eu·phraʹtes, and take from there the belt that I commanded you to hide there.”
So I went to the Eu·phraʹtes and dug up the belt and took it from the place where I had hidden it, and I saw that the belt had been ruined; it was completely useless.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘In the same way I will destroy the pride of Judah and the immense pride of Jerusalem.
These evil people who refuse to obey my words, who stubbornly follow their own heart, and who are following other gods, serving and bowing down to them, will become just like this belt that is completely useless.’
‘For just as a belt clings to the waist of a man, so I made the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah cling to me,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to become to me a people, a name, a praise, and something beautiful. But they did not obey.’
“And you must also give this message to them, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Every large jar should be filled with wine.”’ And they will reply to you, ‘Do we not already know that every large jar should be filled with wine?’
Then say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am filling with drunkenness all the inhabitants of this land, the kings sitting on the throne of David, the priests and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And I will smash them against each other, fathers and sons alike,” declares Jehovah. “I will not show compassion or feel any sorrow or have any mercy on them; nothing will stop me from bringing them to ruin.”’
Hear and pay attention.
Give glory to Jehovah your God
And if you refuse to listen,
Tell the king and the queen mother, ‘Sit in a lower place,
The cities of the south are shut, with no one to open them.
Raise your eyes and see those coming from the north.
What will you say when your punishment comes
And when you say in your heart, ‘Why have these things befallen me?’
Can a Cushʹite change his skin, or a leopard its spots?
So I will scatter them like straw blown by the desert wind.
This is your lot, the portion that I have measured out to you,” declares Jehovah,
Therefore, I will lift up your skirts over your face,
Your acts of adultery and your lustful neighing,
This is the word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah concerning the droughts:
Judah mourns, and its gates have faded away.
And their masters send their servants for water.
Because the ground is cracked,
Even the doe in the field forsakes her newborn
The wild donkeys stand on the bare hills.
Although our own errors testify against us,
O hope of Israel, his Savior in times of distress,
Why are you like a man who is stunned,
This is what Jehovah says concerning this people: “They love to wander about; they have not restrained their feet. So Jehovah finds no pleasure in them. Now he will remember their error and call them to account for their sins.”
Then Jehovah said to me: “Do not pray for good to come to this people.
When they fast, I do not listen to their entreaties, and when they offer whole burnt offerings and grain offerings, I take no pleasure in them, for by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, I will do away with them.”
At this I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Here the prophets are saying to them, ‘You will not see the sword, and famine will not come upon you, but I will give you true peace in this place.’”
Jehovah then said to me: “The prophets are prophesying lies in my name. I have not sent them or commanded them or spoken to them. A lying vision and a worthless divination and the deceit of their own heart is what they are prophesying to you.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says concerning the prophets who are prophesying in my name, though I did not send them, and who say that no sword or famine will occur in this land: ‘By sword and by famine those prophets will perish.
And the people to whom they are prophesying will be cast out into the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword, with no one to bury them—them, their wives, their sons, or their daughters—for I will pour out on them the calamity they deserve.’
“You must speak this word to them,
If I go out into the field and look,
Have you completely rejected Judah, or have you abhorred Zion?
We acknowledge our wickedness, O Jehovah,
For the sake of your name, do not reject us;
Can any of the worthless idols of the nations give rain,
Then Jehovah said to me: “Even if Moses and Samuel were standing before me, I would show no favor toward this people. Drive them out from before me. Let them go.
And if they say to you, ‘Where should we go?’ you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says:
“‘And I will appoint over them four calamities,’ declares Jehovah, ‘the sword to kill, the dogs to drag away, and the birds of the heavens and the beasts of the earth to devour and to destroy.
And I will make them an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth because of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Hez·e·kiʹah, the king of Judah, for what he did in Jerusalem.
Who will show compassion to you, O Jerusalem,
‘You have deserted me,’ declares Jehovah.
And I will winnow them with a fork in the gates of the land.
Their widows will become more numerous before me than the sand of the seas.
The woman who bore seven children has grown faint;
Woe to me, O my mother, because you gave birth to me,
Jehovah said: “I will surely minister to you for good;
Can anyone break iron in pieces,
Your resources and your treasures I will give as plunder,
I will give them to your enemies
You know, O Jehovah,
Your words were found, and I ate them;
I do not sit in the company of merrymakers and rejoice.
Why is my pain chronic and my wound incurable?
Therefore this is what Jehovah says:
“I am making you a fortified copper wall to this people.
“And I will rescue you from the hand of the wicked
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“You must not take a wife for yourself, and you must not have sons and daughters in this place.
For this is what Jehovah says concerning the sons and daughters who are born here and concerning their mothers who give birth to them and concerning their fathers who cause their birth in this land:
‘They will die of deadly diseases, but no one will mourn them or bury them; they will become like manure on the surface of the ground. They will perish by the sword and by famine, and their dead bodies will be food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth.’
For this is what Jehovah says,
Both the great and the small will die in this land.
And no one will provide food for those in mourning,
And do not enter a house of feasting
“For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here in this place, in your days and before your very eyes, I will put an end to the sounds of exultation and rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.’
“When you tell this people all these words, they will ask you, ‘Why has Jehovah spoken of all this great calamity against us? What error and what sin have we committed against Jehovah our God?’
You must reply to them, ‘“Because your forefathers abandoned me,” declares Jehovah, “and they kept following other gods and serving them and bowing down to them. But me they abandoned, and my law they did not keep.
And you have behaved far worse than your forefathers, and each one of you follows the stubbornness of his wicked heart instead of obeying me.
So I will hurl you out of this land into a land that neither you nor your forefathers have known, and there you will have to serve other gods day and night, because I will show you no favor.”’
“‘However, the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when they will no longer say: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt!”
but rather: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel from the land of the north and from all the lands to which he had dispersed them!” and I will bring them back to their land, which I gave to their forefathers.’
‘Here I am sending for many fishermen,’ declares Jehovah,
For my eyes are on everything they do.
First, I will repay the full amount due for their error and their sin,
O Jehovah, my strength and my stronghold,
Can a man make gods for himself
“So I will make them know,
“The sin of Judah is written down with an iron stylus.
While their sons remember their altars and their sacred poles
On the mountains in the open countryside.
You will forfeit, of your own accord, your inheritance that I gave you.
This is what Jehovah says:
He will become like a solitary tree in the desert.
Blessed is the man who puts his trust in Jehovah,
He will become like a tree planted by the waters,
The heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate.
I, Jehovah, am searching the heart,
Like a partridge that gathers what it has not laid,
A glorious throne, exalted from the beginning,
O Jehovah, the hope of Israel,
Heal me, O Jehovah, and I will be healed.
Look! There are those saying to me:
But as for me, I did not run away from following you as a shepherd,
Do not be a cause of terror to me.
Let my persecutors be put to shame,
This is what Jehovah told me: “Go and stand in the gate of the sons of the people by which the kings of Judah go in and out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem.
You must say to them, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, you kings of Judah, all people of Judah, and all inhabitants of Jerusalem, who enter by these gates.
This is what Jehovah says: “Watch yourselves, and do not carry any load on the Sabbath day or bring it in through the gates of Jerusalem.
You must not bring any load out of your homes on the Sabbath day; and you must do no work at all. Keep the Sabbath day sacred, just as I commanded your forefathers.
But they did not listen or incline their ear, and they stubbornly refused to obey or to accept discipline.”’
“‘“However, if you strictly obey me,” declares Jehovah, “and you bring in no load through the gates of this city on the Sabbath day, and you keep the Sabbath day sacred by not doing any work on it,
then kings and princes who sit on the throne of David will also enter in through the gates of this city, riding in the chariot and on horses, they and their princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city will be inhabited for all time.
And people will come from the cities of Judah, from the places around Jerusalem, from the land of Benjamin, from the lowland, from the mountainous region, and from the Negʹeb, bringing whole burnt offerings, sacrifices, grain offerings, frankincense, and thanksgiving sacrifices into the house of Jehovah.
“‘“But if you do not obey me by keeping the Sabbath day sacred and by not carrying loads and bringing them through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, I will set her gates on fire, and it will certainly consume the fortified towers of Jerusalem and will not be extinguished.”’”
This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah:
“Rise up and go down to the house of the potter, and there I will cause you to hear my words.”
So I went down to the house of the potter, and he was working on the potter’s wheels.
But the vessel that the potter was making with the clay was spoiled in his hand. So the potter reworked it into another vessel, just as he saw fit.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“‘Can I not do to you just as this potter did, O house of Israel?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Look! As the clay in the hand of the potter, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel.
Whenever I may speak about uprooting and pulling down and destroying a nation or a kingdom,
and that nation abandons its wickedness that I spoke against, I will also change my mind concerning the calamity that I intended to bring against it.
But whenever I speak about building up and planting a nation or a kingdom,
and it does what is bad in my eyes and does not obey my voice, I will change my mind concerning the good that I intended to do for it.’
“Now say, please, to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am preparing a calamity and devising a scheme against you. Turn back, please, from your bad ways, and reform your ways and your practices.”’”
But they said: “It is hopeless! For we will walk after our own thoughts, and each of us will act according to the stubbornness of his wicked heart.”
Therefore this is what Jehovah says:
Does the snow of Lebʹa·non disappear from the rocks on its slopes?
But my people have forgotten me.
In order to make their land an object of horror
Like the east wind, I will scatter them before the enemy.
And they said: “Come, let us devise a plot against Jeremiah, for the law will not perish from our priests or counsel from the wise men or the word from the prophets. Come and let us speak against him and pay no attention to what he says.”
Do pay attention to me, O Jehovah,
Should good be repaid with bad?
So give their sons over to the famine,
Let a cry be heard from their houses
But you, O Jehovah,
This is what Jehovah said: “Go and buy an earthenware flask from a potter. Take some of the elders of the people and some of the elders of the priests,
and go out to the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, at the entrance of the Gate of the Potsherds. And there proclaim the words that I speak to you.
You will say, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, you kings of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem. This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says:
It is because they abandoned me and made this place unrecognizable. In it they are sacrificing to other gods, whom they and their forefathers and the kings of Judah had not known, and they have filled this place with the blood of the innocent ones.
They built the high places of Baʹal in order to burn their sons in the fire as whole burnt offerings to Baʹal, something that I had not commanded or spoken of and that had never even come into my heart.”’
“‘“Therefore look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when this place will no longer be called Toʹpheth or the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom but the Valley of the Slaughter.
I will thwart the plans of Judah and Jerusalem in this place, and I will make them fall by the sword before their enemies and by the hand of those seeking to take their life. And I will give their dead bodies as food to the birds of the heavens and to the beasts of the earth.
And I will make this city an object of horror and something to whistle at. Every last one passing by it will stare in horror and whistle over all its plagues.
And I will make them eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, and they will each eat the flesh of his fellow man, because of the siege and their desperation when they are hemmed in by their enemies and those seeking to take their life.”’
“Then break the flask before the eyes of the men who go with you,
and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “This is how I will break this people and this city, like someone who breaks a potter’s vessel so that it can never be repaired; and they will bury the dead in Toʹpheth until there is no more room to bury them.”’
“‘That is what I will do to this place,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and to its inhabitants, to make this city like Toʹpheth.
And the houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah will become unclean like this place, Toʹpheth, yes, all the houses on whose roofs they offered sacrifices to all the army of the heavens and where they poured out drink offerings to other gods.’”
When Jeremiah returned from Toʹpheth where Jehovah sent him to prophesy, he stood in the courtyard of the house of Jehovah and said to all the people:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am bringing on this city and on all its towns all the calamity that I have spoken against it, because they stubbornly refused to obey my words.’”
Now Pashʹhur the son of Imʹmer, the priest, who was also the leading commissioner in the house of Jehovah, was listening when Jeremiah prophesied these things.
Then Pashʹhur struck Jeremiah the prophet and put him in the stocks that were at the Upper Gate of Benjamin, which was in the house of Jehovah.
But on the following day when Pashʹhur released Jeremiah from the stocks, Jeremiah said to him:
For this is what Jehovah says, ‘I will make you an object of terror to yourself and to all your friends, and they will fall by the sword of their enemies while your eyes are looking on; and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will take them into exile in Babylon and put them to death by the sword.
And I will give all the wealth of this city, all its resources, all its precious things, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah into the hand of their enemies. And they will plunder them and seize them and take them to Babylon.
And as for you, Pashʹhur, and all who live in your house, you will go into captivity. You will go off to Babylon and die there, and you will be buried there with all your friends, because you have prophesied lies to them.’”
You have fooled me, O Jehovah, and I was fooled.
For whenever I speak, I must cry out and proclaim,
So I said: “I am not going to make mention of him,
For I heard many evil rumors;
But Jehovah was with me like a fearsome warrior.
But you, O Jehovah of armies, are examining the righteous one;
Sing to Jehovah! Praise Jehovah!
Cursed be the day I was born!
Cursed be the man who brought good news to my father, saying:
May that man become like cities that Jehovah overthrew without regret.
Why did he not put me to death in the womb,
Why did I have to come out of the womb
Jeremiah received the word from Jehovah when King Zed·e·kiʹah sent to him Pashʹhur son of Mal·chiʹjah and Zeph·a·niʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah, the priest, requesting:
“Please inquire of Jehovah in our behalf, because King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon is waging war against us. Perhaps Jehovah will perform one of his wonderful works in our behalf, so that he will withdraw from us.”
Jeremiah said to them: “This is what you should say to Zed·e·kiʹah,
‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Here I am turning around against you the weapons of war that are in your own hands, with which you are fighting the king of Babylon and the Chal·deʹans who are outside the wall besieging you. And I will gather them into the middle of this city.
And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and a mighty arm, with anger and wrath and great indignation.
I will strike the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast. By a great pestilence they will die.”’
“‘“And after that,” declares Jehovah, “I will give King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and his servants and the people of this city—those who survive the pestilence, the sword, and the famine—into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who are seeking to take their life. He will strike them down with the sword. He will not feel sorry for them, nor will he show compassion or have any mercy.”’
“And to this people you should say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am putting before you the way of life and the way of death.
Those who remain in this city will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. But whoever goes out and surrenders to the Chal·deʹans who are besieging you will keep living, and he will have his life as a spoil.”’
“‘“For I have set my face against this city for calamity and not for good,” declares Jehovah. “It will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.”
“‘To the household of the king of Judah: Hear the word of Jehovah.
O house of David, this is what Jehovah says:
‘Here I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley,
I will hold an accounting against you
This is what Jehovah says: “Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and deliver this message.
You must say, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, O king of Judah who sits on the throne of David, you with your servants and your people, those who enter through these gates.
This is what Jehovah says: “Uphold justice and righteousness. Rescue the one being robbed from the hand of the defrauder. Do not mistreat any foreign resident, and do not harm any fatherless child or widow. And do not shed any innocent blood in this place.
For if you are careful to carry out this word, then the kings who sit on the throne of David will enter through the gates of this house, riding in chariots and on horses, they with their servants and their people.”’
“‘But if you will not obey these words, by myself I do swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that this house will become a devastated place.’
“For this is what Jehovah says concerning the house of the king of Judah,
And I will appoint destroyers against you,
“‘And many nations will pass by this city and say to one another: “Why did Jehovah do this to this great city?”
And they will reply: “Because they abandoned the covenant of Jehovah their God and bowed down to other gods and served them.”’
Do not weep for the dead one,
“For this is what Jehovah says concerning Shalʹlum son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah who is reigning instead of his father Jo·siʹah and who has gone out of this place: ‘He will return there no more.
For he will die in the place where they have taken him into exile, and he will see this land no more.’
Woe to the one who builds his house without righteousness
The one saying, ‘I will build for myself a roomy house
Will you continue reigning because you outdo others in your use of cedar?
He defended the legal claim of the afflicted one and the poor one,
‘But your eyes and heart are set only on your dishonest gain,
“Therefore this is what Jehovah says concerning Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah,
With the burial of a donkey he will be buried,
Go up to Lebʹa·non and cry out,
I spoke to you when you felt secure.
A wind will shepherd all your shepherds,
O you who dwell in Lebʹa·non,
“‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares Jehovah, ‘even if Co·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, were the seal ring on my right hand, I would pull you off from there!
I will give you into the hand of those seeking to take your life, into the hand of those whom you fear, into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chal·deʹans.
And I will hurl you and your mother who gave birth to you into another land where you were not born, and there you will die.
And they will never return to the land they yearn for.
Is this man Co·niʹah just a despised, broken pot,
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what Jehovah says:
“Woe to the shepherds who are destroying and scattering the sheep of my pasture!” declares Jehovah.
Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says against the shepherds who are shepherding my people: “You have scattered my sheep; you kept dispersing them, and you have not turned your attention to them.”
“Then I will gather together the remnant of my sheep from all the lands to which I have dispersed them, and I will bring them back to their pasture, and they will be fruitful and become many.
And I will raise up over them shepherds who will really shepherd them. They will no longer be afraid or be terrified, and none will be missing,” declares Jehovah.
“Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will raise up to David a righteous sprout. And a king will reign and show insight and uphold justice and righteousness in the land.
In his days Judah will be saved, and Israel will reside in security. And this is the name by which he will be called: Jehovah Is Our Righteousness.”
“However, the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when they will no longer say, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt!’
but rather, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought out and brought back the descendants of the house of Israel from the land of the north and from all the lands to which I had dispersed them,’ and they will dwell in their own land.”
Concerning the prophets:
For the land is full of adulterers;
“Both the prophet and the priest are polluted.
“So their path will become slippery and dark;
“And in the prophets of Sa·marʹi·a I have seen what is repulsive.
And in the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen horrible things.
Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says against the prophets:
This is what Jehovah of armies says:
They are saying again and again to those who disrespect me,
For who has stood in the inner circle of Jehovah
Look! The windstorm of Jehovah will burst out in fury;
The anger of Jehovah will not turn back
I did not send the prophets, yet they ran.
But if they had stood in my inner circle,
“Am I only a God nearby,” declares Jehovah, “and not a God also from far away?”
“Can any man hide in a concealed place where I cannot see him?” declares Jehovah.
“I have heard the prophets who are prophesying lies in my name say, ‘I had a dream! I had a dream!’
How long will this continue in the heart of the prophets, to prophesy lies? They are prophets of the deceit of their own heart.
They intend to make my people forget my name by the dreams they relate to one another, just as their fathers forgot my name because of Baʹal.
Let the prophet who has a dream relate the dream, but the one who has my word should speak my word truthfully.”
“Is not my word just like a fire,” declares Jehovah, “and like a forge hammer that smashes the crag?”
“So here I am against the prophets,” declares Jehovah, “who steal my words from one another.”
“Here I am against the prophets,” declares Jehovah, “those who use their tongue to say, ‘He declares!’”
“Here I am against the prophets of lying dreams,” declares Jehovah, “who relate them and lead my people astray because of their lies and their boasting.”
“And when this people or a prophet or a priest asks you, ‘What is the burden of Jehovah?’ you should reply to them, ‘“You people are the burden! And I will cast you off,” declares Jehovah.’
As for the prophet or the priest or the people who say, ‘This is the burden of Jehovah!’ I will turn my attention on that man and on his household.
This is what each of you is saying to his fellow and to his brother, ‘What has Jehovah answered? And what has Jehovah spoken?’
But the burden of Jehovah you should mention no more, for the burden is each one’s own word, and you have changed the words of the living God, Jehovah of armies, our God.
“This is what you will say to the prophet, ‘What answer has Jehovah given you? And what has Jehovah spoken?
And if you keep saying, “The burden of Jehovah!” this is what Jehovah says: “Because of your saying, ‘This word is the burden of Jehovah,’ after I told you, ‘You must not say: “The burden of Jehovah!”’
look! I will lift you up and throw you away from my presence, both you and the city that I gave to you and your forefathers.
And I will bring on you everlasting disgrace and everlasting humiliation, which will not be forgotten.”’”
Then Jehovah showed me two baskets of figs set before the temple of Jehovah, after King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon had carried into exile Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, along with the princes of Judah, the craftsmen, and the metalworkers; he took them from Jerusalem to Babylon.
One basket had very good figs, like early figs, but the other basket had very bad figs, so bad that they could not be eaten.
Jehovah then asked me: “What do you see, Jeremiah?” So I said: “Figs; the good figs are very good, but the bad ones are very bad, so bad that they cannot be eaten.”
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Like these good figs, so I will regard in a good way the exiles of Judah, whom I have sent away from this place to the land of the Chal·deʹans.
I will keep my eye on them for their good, and I will cause them to return to this land. I will build them up, and I will not tear down; I will plant them, and I will not uproot.
And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am Jehovah. They will become my people, and I will become their God, for they will return to me with all their heart.
“‘But concerning the bad figs that are so bad they cannot be eaten, this is what Jehovah says: “So I will regard King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, his princes, the remnant of Jerusalem who are left in this land, and those who are dwelling in the land of Egypt.
I will make them an object of horror and calamity to all the kingdoms of the earth, a reproach, a proverbial saying, a cause for ridicule, and a curse in all the places to which I disperse them.
And I will send against them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, until they have perished from the land that I gave to them and to their forefathers.”’”
The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, which was the first year of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon.
This is what Jeremiah the prophet spoke concerning all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem:
“From the th year of Jo·siʹah son of Aʹmon, the king of Judah, to this day, these  years, the word of Jehovah has come to me, and I kept speaking to you again and again, but you would not listen.
And Jehovah sent all his servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, but you would not listen or incline your ear to hear.
They would say, ‘Turn back, please, each of you from your evil ways and your evil deeds; then you will continue dwelling for a long time to come in the land that Jehovah long ago gave to you and to your forefathers.
Do not follow other gods and serve them and bow down to them, offending me with the work of your hands; otherwise I will bring calamity on you.’
“‘But you would not listen to me,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Instead you offended me with the work of your hands, to your own calamity.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘“Because you would not obey my words,
I am sending for all the families of the north,” declares Jehovah, “sending for King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, my servant, and I will bring them against this land and against its inhabitants and against all these surrounding nations. I will devote them to destruction and make them an object of horror and something to whistle at and a perpetual ruin.
I will put an end to the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing from them, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the hand mill and the light of the lamp.
And all this land will be reduced to ruins and will become an object of horror, and these nations will have to serve the king of Babylon for  years.”’
“‘But when  years have been fulfilled, I will call to account the king of Babylon and that nation for their error,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and I will make the land of the Chal·deʹans a desolate wasteland for all time.
I will bring on that land all my words that I have spoken against it, all that is written in this book that Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations.
For many nations and great kings will make slaves of them, and I will repay them according to their deeds and the work of their own hands.’”
For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel said to me: “Take this cup of the wine of wrath out of my hand, and make all the nations to whom I send you drink it.
And they will drink and stagger and act like madmen because of the sword that I am sending among them.”
So I took the cup out of the hand of Jehovah and made all the nations to whom Jehovah sent me drink:
starting with Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, her kings and her princes, to make them a ruin, an object of horror, something to whistle at and a curse, as it is today;
then Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and his servants, his princes, and all his people,
and all their mixed populations; all the kings of the land of Uz; all the kings of the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, Ashʹke·lon, Gazʹa, Ekʹron, and those remaining of Ashʹdod;
Eʹdom, Moʹab, and the Amʹmon·ites;
all the kings of Tyre, all the kings of Siʹdon, and the kings of the island in the sea;
Deʹdan, Teʹma, Buz, and all those with hair clipped at the temples;
all the kings of the Arabians and all the kings of the mixed populations who reside in the wilderness;
all the kings of Zimʹri, all the kings of Eʹlam, and all the kings of the Medes;
and all the kings of the north near and far, one after the other, and all the other kingdoms of the earth that are on the surface of the ground; and the king of Sheʹshach will drink after them.
“And you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Drink and get drunk and vomit and fall so that you cannot get up because of the sword that I am sending among you.”’
And if they refuse to take the cup out of your hand to drink, say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “You must drink it!
For look! if I am bringing calamity first on the city that bears my name, should you go unpunished?”’
“And you are to prophesy all these words to them and say to them,
‘A noise will resound to the ends of the earth,
This is what Jehovah of armies says:
“‘And those slain by Jehovah in that day will be from one end of the earth clear to the other end of the earth. They will not be mourned, nor will they be gathered up or buried. They will become like manure on the surface of the ground.’
Wail, you shepherds, and cry out!
The shepherds have no place to flee,
Listen! The outcry of the shepherds
And the peaceful dwelling places have been made lifeless
He has left his lair just like a young lion,
In the beginning of the reign of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came from Jehovah:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘Stand in the courtyard of the house of Jehovah and speak concerning all the people of the cities of Judah who are coming in to worship at the house of Jehovah. Tell them everything that I command you; do not take away a word.
Perhaps they will listen and each one will turn back from his evil way, and I will change my mind concerning the calamity that I intend to bring on them because of their evil deeds.
Say to them: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘If you will not listen to me by following my law that I have placed before you,
by listening to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I am sending to you again and again, whom you have not listened to,
then I will make this house like Shiʹloh, and I will make this city an object of cursing to all the nations of the earth.’”’”
And the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah.
So when Jeremiah had finished speaking all that Jehovah had commanded him to speak to all the people, then the priests and the prophets and all the people seized him and said: “You will surely die.
Why have you prophesied in the name of Jehovah, saying, ‘This house will become like Shiʹloh, and this city will be devastated and left without an inhabitant’?” And all the people gathered around Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.
When the princes of Judah heard these words, they came up from the house of the king to the house of Jehovah and sat down at the entrance of the new gate of Jehovah.
The priests and the prophets said to the princes and to all the people: “This man deserves the death penalty, because he has prophesied against this city just as you have heard with your own ears.”
Jeremiah then said to all the princes and to all the people: “It was Jehovah who sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that you have heard.
So now, reform your ways and your actions and obey the voice of Jehovah your God, and Jehovah will change his mind concerning the calamity that he has spoken against you.
But as for me, I am in your hand. Do to me whatever seems good and right in your eyes.
Only know for certain that if you put me to death, you will bring innocent blood upon yourselves and upon this city and upon her inhabitants, for in truth Jehovah sent me to you to speak all these words in your hearing.”
Then the princes and all the people said to the priests and the prophets: “This man does not deserve the death penalty, for he spoke to us in the name of Jehovah our God.”
Furthermore, some of the elders of the land rose up and began saying to the entire congregation of the people:
“Miʹcah of Moʹresh·eth was prophesying in the days of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, and he said to all the people of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says:
“Did King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and all Judah then put him to death? Did he not fear Jehovah and beg for Jehovah’s favor, so that Jehovah changed his mind concerning the calamity that he had spoken against them? So we are about to bring a great calamity on ourselves.
“And there was another man prophesying in the name of Jehovah, U·riʹjah son of She·maiʹah from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, who prophesied against this city and against this land with words like those of Jeremiah.
King Je·hoiʹa·kim and all his mighty men and all the princes heard his words, and the king sought to put him to death. When U·riʹjah heard of it, he at once became afraid and fled to Egypt.
Then King Je·hoiʹa·kim sent El·naʹthan the son of Achʹbor and other men with him to Egypt.
They brought U·riʹjah from Egypt and took him to King Je·hoiʹa·kim, who then struck him down with the sword and cast his dead body into the graveyard of the common people.”
But A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan supported Jeremiah, so that he was not handed over to the people to be put to death.
In the beginning of the reign of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah:
“This is what Jehovah has told me, ‘Make for yourself straps and yoke bars, and put them on your neck.
Then send them to the king of Eʹdom, the king of Moʹab, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, the king of Tyre, and the king of Siʹdon by the hand of the messengers who have come to Jerusalem to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah.
Give them this command for their masters:
‘It is I who made the earth, mankind, and the beasts that are on the surface of the earth by my great power and by my outstretched arm; and I have given it to whomever I please.
And now I have given all these lands into the hand of my servant King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon; even the wild beasts of the field I have given him to serve him.
All the nations will serve him and his son and his grandson until the time for his own land comes, when many nations and great kings will make him their slave.’
“‘“‘If any nation or kingdom refuses to serve King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and refuses to put its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, I will punish that nation with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence,’ declares Jehovah, ‘until I have finished them off by his hand.’
“‘“‘Therefore, do not listen to your prophets, your diviners, your dreamers, your magicians, and your sorcerers, who are saying to you: “You will not serve the king of Babylon.”
For they are prophesying lies to you, so that you will be taken far away from your land and I will disperse you and you will perish.
“‘“‘But the nation that brings its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serves him, I will allow to remain on its land,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to cultivate it and dwell in it.’”’”
Also to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah I spoke in the same way, saying: “Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serve him and his people, and you will keep living.
Why should you and your people die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, as Jehovah has said about the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?
Do not listen to the words of the prophets who are saying to you, ‘You will not serve the king of Babylon,’ because they are prophesying lies to you.
“‘For I have not sent them,’ declares Jehovah, ‘but they are prophesying lies in my name, with the result that I will disperse you and you will perish, you and the prophets who are prophesying to you.’”
And to the priests and to all this people I said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Do not listen to the words of your prophets who are prophesying to you: “Look! The utensils of the house of Jehovah will be brought back from Babylon very soon!” for they are prophesying lies to you.
Do not listen to them. Serve the king of Babylon and you will keep living. Why should this city become a ruin?
But if they are prophets and if the word of Jehovah is with them, please let them beg Jehovah of armies that the remaining utensils in the house of Jehovah, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem may not be taken away to Babylon.’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says concerning the pillars, the Sea, the carriages, and the remaining utensils that are left in this city,
which King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon did not take when he took into exile Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, together with all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem;
yes, this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says concerning the utensils that are left at the house of Jehovah, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem:
‘“To Babylon they will be brought, and there they will remain until the day I turn my attention to them,” declares Jehovah. “Then I will bring them back and restore them to this place.”’”
In that same year, in the beginning of the reign of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, the prophet Han·a·niʹah the son of Azʹzur from Gibʹe·on said to me in the house of Jehovah in the presence of the priests and all the people:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.
Within two years I am bringing back to this place all the utensils of the house of Jehovah that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon took from this place and brought to Babylon.’”
“‘And I will bring back to this place Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, and all the exiles of Judah who have gone to Babylon,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.’”
Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Han·a·niʹah the prophet in the presence of the priests and all the people who were standing in the house of Jehovah.
Jeremiah the prophet said: “Amen! May Jehovah do this! May Jehovah fulfill your words that you prophesied by bringing back from Babylon to this place the utensils of the house of Jehovah and all the exiled people!
However, hear, please, this message that I am speaking in your ears and in the ears of all the people.
Long ago the prophets who were prior to me and prior to you used to prophesy concerning many lands and great kingdoms, about war, calamity, and pestilence.
If a prophet prophesies about peace and the word of that prophet comes true, then it will be known that Jehovah truly sent that prophet.”
At that Han·a·niʹah the prophet took the yoke bar off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah and broke it.
Han·a·niʹah then said in the presence of all the people: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Just like this I will break the yoke of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon from off the neck of all the nations within two years.’” And Jeremiah the prophet went on his way.
After Han·a·niʹah the prophet had broken the yoke bar from off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet, this message of Jehovah came to Jeremiah:
“Go and say to Han·a·niʹah, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You have broken yoke bars of wood, but instead of them you will make yoke bars of iron.”
For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “I will put an iron yoke bar on the neck of all these nations, to serve King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and they must serve him. Even the wild beasts of the field I will give him.”’”
Jeremiah the prophet then said to Han·a·niʹah the prophet: “Listen, please, O Han·a·niʹah! Jehovah has not sent you, but you have caused this people to trust in a lie.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Look! I am removing you from the face of the ground. This year you will die, for you have urged rebellion against Jehovah.’”
So Han·a·niʹah the prophet died in that year, in the seventh month.
These are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the rest of the elders among the exiled people, the priests, the prophets, and all the people, whom Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon,
after King Jec·o·niʹah, the queen mother, the court officials, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the craftsmen and the metalworkers had gone out of Jerusalem.
He sent the letter by the hand of El·aʹsah the son of Shaʹphan and Gem·a·riʹah the son of Hil·kiʹah, whom King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah sent to Babylon to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon. It said:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says to all the exiled people, whom I have caused to go into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon,
‘Build houses and live in them. Plant gardens and eat their fruit.
Take wives and have sons and daughters; take wives for your sons and give your daughters in marriage, so that they too may have sons and daughters. Become many there, and do not decrease.
And seek the peace of the city to which I have exiled you, and pray in its behalf to Jehovah, for in its peace you will have peace.
For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Do not let your prophets and your diviners who are among you deceive you, and do not listen to the dreams that they are dreaming.
For ‘they are prophesying lies to you in my name. I have not sent them,’ declares Jehovah.”’”
“For this is what Jehovah says, ‘When  years at Babylon are fulfilled, I will turn my attention to you, and I will make good my promise by bringing you back to this place.’
“‘For I well know the thoughts that I am thinking toward you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘thoughts of peace, and not of calamity, to give you a future and a hope.
And you will call me and come and pray to me, and I will listen to you.’
“‘You will seek me and find me, for you will search for me with all your heart.
And I will let you find me,’ declares Jehovah. ‘And I will gather your captives and collect you together out of all the nations and places to which I have dispersed you,’ declares Jehovah. ‘And I will bring you back to the place from which I caused you to go into exile.’
“But you have said, ‘Jehovah has raised up prophets for us in Babylon.’
“For this is what Jehovah says to the king sitting on the throne of David and to all the people dwelling in this city, your brothers who have not gone with you into exile,
‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here I am sending against them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and I will make them like rotten figs that are so bad they cannot be eaten.”’
“‘And I will pursue them with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence, and I will make them an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth, and a curse, and an object of astonishment, something to whistle at, and a reproach among all the nations to which I disperse them,
because they have not listened to my words that I sent to them with my servants the prophets,’ declares Jehovah, ‘sending them again and again.’
“Therefore, hear the word of Jehovah, all you exiled people, whom I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon.
This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says concerning Aʹhab the son of Ko·laiʹah and concerning Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah, who are prophesying lies to you in my name, ‘Here I am giving them into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will strike them down before your eyes.
And what happens to them will become a curse spoken by all the exiles of Judah in Babylon: “May Jehovah make you like Zed·e·kiʹah and like Aʹhab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire!”
for they have acted disgracefully in Israel, committing adultery with the wives of their neighbors and speaking false words in my name that I did not command them.
“And to She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam you will say,
‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Because you sent in your name letters to all the people who are in Jerusalem, to Zeph·a·niʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah, the priest, and to all the priests, saying,
‘Jehovah has made you priest instead of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest to become the overseer of the house of Jehovah, to be in charge of any madman who acts like a prophet and to put him into the stocks and into the pillory;
why, then, have you not rebuked Jeremiah of Anʹa·thoth, who is acting as a prophet for you?
For he even sent to us at Babylon, saying: “It will be a long time! Build houses and live in them. Plant gardens and eat their fruit,—”’”’”
When Zeph·a·niʹah the priest read this letter in the hearing of Jeremiah the prophet,
the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying:
“Send to all the exiled people, saying, ‘This is what Jehovah says concerning She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam: “Because She·maiʹah prophesied to you, though I did not send him, and he tried to make you trust in lies,
therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am turning my attention to She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam and his descendants. Not one man of his will survive among this people, and he will not see the good that I will do for my people,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for he has urged rebellion against Jehovah.’”’”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Write in a book all the words that I speak to you.
For “look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will gather the captives of my people, Israel and Judah,” says Jehovah, “and I will bring them back to the land that I gave to their forefathers, and they will possess it once again.”’”
These are the words that Jehovah spoke to Israel and Judah.
This is what Jehovah says:
Ask, please, whether a man can give birth.
Alas! For that day is a terrible one.
“And in that day,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will break the yoke from off your neck, and your straps I will tear in two; and no more will strangers make him their slave.
They will serve Jehovah their God and David their king, whom I will raise up for them.”
“And you, my servant Jacob, do not be afraid,” declares Jehovah,
“For I am with you,” declares Jehovah, “to save you.
For this is what Jehovah says:
There is no one to plead your cause,
All your passionate lovers have forgotten you.
Why do you cry out because of your breakdown?
Therefore all those devouring you will be devoured,
“But I will restore your health and heal your wounds,” declares Jehovah,
This is what Jehovah says:
And from them will come thanksgiving and the sounds of laughter.
His sons will become as in the past,
His majestic one will be one of his own,
“And you will become my people, and I will be your God.”
Look! A windstorm of Jehovah will burst out in fury,
The burning anger of Jehovah will not turn back
“At that time,” declares Jehovah, “I will become God to all the families of Israel, and they will become my people.”
This is what Jehovah says:
From far away Jehovah appeared to me and said:
Yet again I will rebuild you and you will be rebuilt.
You will again plant vineyards in the mountains of Sa·marʹi·a;
For the day will come when the watchmen in the mountains of Eʹphra·im will call out:
For this is what Jehovah says:
I am bringing them back from the land of the north.
They will come weeping.
Hear the word of Jehovah, you nations,
For Jehovah will redeem Jacob
They will come and shout joyfully on the height of Zion
“At that time the virgin will dance joyfully,
I will satisfy the priests with plenty,
“This is what Jehovah says:
This is what Jehovah says:
‘And there is a hope for your future,’ declares Jehovah.
“I have surely heard Eʹphra·im’s moaning,
For after my turning back I felt remorse;
“Is Eʹphra·im not a precious son to me, a beloved child?
“Set up road markers for yourself,
How long will you waver, O unfaithful daughter?
This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “They will again say these words in the land of Judah and in its cities when I gather back their captives: ‘May Jehovah bless you, O righteous dwelling place, O holy mountain.’
And in it Judah and all its cities will dwell all together, farmers and those who lead the flocks.
For I will satisfy the weary one and fill each one who is languishing.”
At this I awoke and opened my eyes, and my sleep had been pleasurable to me.
“Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and with the seed of livestock.”
“And just as I watched over them to uproot, to pull down, to tear down, to destroy, and to do harm, so I will watch over them to build up and to plant,” declares Jehovah.
“In those days they will no longer say, ‘The fathers ate sour grapes, but the teeth of the sons were set on edge.’
But then each one will die for his own error. Any man eating sour grapes will have his own teeth set on edge.”
“Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant.
It will not be like the covenant that I made with their forefathers on the day I took hold of their hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, ‘my covenant that they broke, although I was their true master,’ declares Jehovah.”
“For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,” declares Jehovah. “I will put my law within them, and in their heart I will write it. And I will become their God, and they will become my people.”
“And they will no longer teach each one his neighbor and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know Jehovah!’ for they will all know me, from the least to the greatest of them,” declares Jehovah. “For I will forgive their error, and I will no longer remember their sin.”
This is what Jehovah says,
“‘If these regulations should ever fail,’ declares Jehovah,
This is what Jehovah says: “‘If the heavens above could be measured and the foundations of the earth below could be explored, only then could I reject all the offspring of Israel for all they have done,’ declares Jehovah.”
“Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when the city will be built to Jehovah from the Tower of Ha·nanʹel to the Corner Gate.
And the measuring line will go out straight ahead to the hill of Gaʹreb, and it will turn toward Goʹah.
And all the valley of the carcasses and of ashes and all the terraces as far as the Kidʹron Valley, clear to the corner of the Horse Gate toward the east, will be something holy to Jehovah. It will never again be uprooted or torn down.”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, that is, the th year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar.
At that time the armies of the king of Babylon were besieging Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was confined in the Courtyard of the Guard in the house of the king of Judah.
For King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah had confined him, saying, “Why do you prophesy like this? You say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it,
and King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah will not escape from the Chal·deʹans, for he will surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will speak to him face-to-face and see him eye to eye.”’
‘He will take Zed·e·kiʹah to Babylon, and there he will remain until I turn my attention to him,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Although you keep fighting against the Chal·deʹans, you will not succeed.’”
Jeremiah said: “The word of Jehovah has come to me, saying,
‘Here Hanʹa·mel the son of Shalʹlum your uncle will come to you and say: “Buy for yourself my field in Anʹa·thoth, because you have the first right to repurchase it.”’”
Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle came to me, just as Jehovah had said, into the Courtyard of the Guard, and he said to me: “Please buy my field in Anʹa·thoth, in the land of Benjamin, for you have the right to take possession of it and to repurchase it. Buy it for yourself.” At that I knew that this was by the word of Jehovah.
So I bought the field in Anʹa·thoth from Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle. I weighed out the money to him, seven shekels and ten silver pieces.
Then I recorded it in a deed, affixed the seal, called in witnesses, and weighed the money in the scales.
I took the deed of purchase, the one that was sealed according to the commandment and legal requirements, as well as the one that was left unsealed,
and I gave the deed of purchase to Barʹuch son of Ne·riʹah son of Mah·seiʹah in the presence of Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle, the witnesses who wrote in the deed of purchase, and all the Jews who were sitting in the Courtyard of the Guard.
I now commanded Barʹuch in their presence, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Take these deeds, this deed of purchase, the sealed one and the other deed left unsealed, and put them into an earthenware vessel, so that they may be kept for a long time.’
For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Houses and fields and vineyards will again be bought in this land.’”
Then I prayed to Jehovah after giving the deed of purchase to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, saying:
“Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Look! You made the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm. Nothing is too wonderful for you,
the One showing loyal love to thousands, but repaying the error of the fathers to their sons after them, the true God, the great and mighty One, whose name is Jehovah of armies.
You are great in counsel and mighty in deed, you whose eyes observe all the ways of men, to give to each one according to his ways and according to what he does.
You have performed signs and miracles in the land of Egypt, which are known down to this day, and thus you have made a name for yourself in Israel and among mankind, as it is today.
And you brought your people Israel out of the land of Egypt, with signs, with miracles, with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with terrifying deeds.
“In time you gave them this land that you swore to give to their forefathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.
And they came in and took possession of it, but they did not obey your voice or walk in your law. They did not do anything you commanded them to do, so that you caused all this calamity to befall them.
Look! Men have come with siege ramparts to capture the city, and because of the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, the city will certainly fall into the hands of the Chal·deʹans who are fighting against it; what you said has all happened, as you now see.
But you have told me, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘Buy for yourself the field with money and call in witnesses,’ although the city will certainly be given into the hand of the Chal·deʹans.”
At that the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying:
“Here I am, Jehovah, the God of all mankind. Is there anything too wonderful for me?
So this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am handing this city over to the Chal·deʹans and into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will capture it.
And the Chal·deʹans fighting against this city will come in and set this city on fire and burn it down along with the houses on whose roofs the people offered sacrifices to Baʹal and poured out drink offerings to other gods to offend me.’
“‘For the people of Israel and of Judah have done only what was bad in my eyes, from their youth on; the people of Israel keep offending me by the work of their hands,’ declares Jehovah.
‘For this city, from the day that they built it down to this day, has been nothing but a cause of anger and wrath to me, so that it must be removed from before my face,
because of all the evil that the people of Israel and of Judah have done to offend me—they, their kings, their princes, their priests, their prophets, and the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They kept turning their backs to me, not their faces; although I tried to teach them again and again, none of them would listen to receive discipline.
And they put their disgusting idols in the house that bears my name, in order to defile it.
Furthermore, they built the high places of Baʹal in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, in order to make their sons and their daughters pass through the fire to Moʹlech, something that I had not commanded them and that had never come into my heart to do such a detestable thing, causing Judah to sin.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning this city that you are saying will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, the famine, and the pestilence,
‘Here I will gather them together from all the lands where I dispersed them in my anger and in my wrath and in great indignation, and I will bring them back to this place and let them dwell in security.
And they will be my people, and I will be their God.
And I will give them one heart and one way so that they may always fear me, for their own good and the good of their children after them.
And I will make with them an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn away from doing good to them; and I will put the fear of me in their hearts, so that they will not turn away from me.
I will exult over them to do good to them, and I will firmly plant them in this land, with all my heart and with all my soul.’”
“For this is what Jehovah says, ‘Just as I have brought on this people all this great calamity, so I will bring on them all the goodness that I am promising them.
And fields will again be bought in this land, though you are saying: “It is a wasteland without man and beast, and it has been handed over to the Chal·deʹans.”’
“‘Fields will be bought with money, deeds of purchase will be recorded and sealed, and witnesses will be called in the land of Benjamin, in the areas around Jerusalem, in the cities of Judah, in the cities of the mountainous region, in the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the south, because I will bring back their captives,’ declares Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the second time, while he was still confined in the Courtyard of the Guard, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the Maker of earth says, Jehovah who formed it and firmly established it; Jehovah is his name,
‘Call to me, and I will answer you and readily tell you great and incomprehensible things that you have not known.’”
“For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning the houses of this city and the houses of the kings of Judah that are pulled down because of the siege ramparts and the sword,
and concerning those who are coming to fight the Chal·deʹans, filling these places with the carcasses of those whom I struck down in my anger and in my wrath, those whose evil has caused me to hide my face from this city:
‘Here I am bringing recuperation and health to her, and I will heal them and reveal to them an abundance of peace and truth.
And I will bring back the captives of Judah and the captives of Israel, and I will build them up as I did at the start.
And I will purify them from all the guilt of their sins against me, and I will forgive all the guilt of their sins and their transgressions against me.
And she will become to me a name of exultation, a praise, and a beauty before all the nations of the earth who will hear of all the goodness that I bestow on them. And they will be in dread and will tremble because of all the goodness and peace that I will bestow on her.’”
“This is what Jehovah says: ‘In this place that you will say is a wasteland, without man or livestock, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem that are desolate, without man or inhabitant or livestock, there will again be heard
the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of those saying: “Give thanks to Jehovah of armies, for Jehovah is good; his loyal love endures forever!”’
“This is what Jehovah of armies says: ‘In this wasteland, without man or livestock, and in all its cities, there will again be pastures for the shepherds to rest their flocks.’
“‘In the cities of the mountainous region, in the cities of the lowland, in the cities of the south, in the land of Benjamin, in the areas around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, flocks will again pass under the hands of the one counting them,’ says Jehovah.”
“‘Look! The days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when I will fulfill the good promise that I have spoken concerning the house of Israel and the house of Judah.
In those days and at that time I will cause to sprout for David a righteous sprout, and he will execute justice and righteousness in the land.
In those days Judah will be saved and Jerusalem will reside in security. And this is what she will be called: Jehovah Is Our Righteousness.’”
“For this is what Jehovah says: ‘There will never fail to be a man from David’s line to sit on the throne of the house of Israel,
nor will the Levitical priests ever fail to have a man stand before me to offer whole burnt offerings, to burn grain offerings, and to offer sacrifices.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘If you could break my covenant regarding the day and my covenant regarding the night, to prevent day and night from coming at their proper time,
only then could my covenant with my servant David be broken, so that he should not have a son ruling as king on his throne, and so also my covenant with the Levitical priests, my ministers.
Just as the army of the heavens cannot be counted and the sand of the sea cannot be measured, so I will multiply the offspring of my servant David and the Levites who are ministering to me.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah, saying:
“Have you not taken note of what this people is saying, ‘Jehovah will reject the two families that he chose’? And they are treating my own people with disrespect, and they no longer regard them as a nation.
“This is what Jehovah says: ‘Just as surely as I have established my covenant regarding the day and the night, the laws of heaven and earth,
so I will never reject the offspring of Jacob and of my servant David, so as not to take from his offspring rulers over the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For I will gather back their captives and have pity on them.’”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and all his army and all the kingdoms of the earth under his dominion and all the peoples were fighting against Jerusalem and all her cities:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Go and speak to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and tell him: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am giving this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.
And you will not escape out of his hand, for you will without fail be caught and handed over to him. And you will see the king of Babylon eye to eye, and he will speak to you face-to-face, and you will go to Babylon.’
However, hear the word of Jehovah, O King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah says concerning you: “You will not die by the sword.
In peace you will die, and they will make a burning ceremony for you as they did for your fathers, the former kings who were before you, and they will mourn you, ‘Alas, O master!’ for ‘I have spoken the word,’ declares Jehovah.”’”’”
Jeremiah the prophet then spoke all these words to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah in Jerusalem,
when the armies of the king of Babylon were fighting against Jerusalem and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Laʹchish and against A·zeʹkah; for they were the only fortified cities that remained of the cities of Judah.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah after King Zed·e·kiʹah had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem to proclaim liberty to them,
that everyone should free his Hebrew slaves, male and female, so that no one would keep a fellow Jew as his slave.
So all the princes and all the people obeyed. They had entered into the covenant that everyone should free his male and female slaves and not keep them as slaves any longer. They obeyed and let them go.
However, they later brought back the male and female slaves whom they had freed, and they again forced them back into slavery.
So the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I made a covenant with your forefathers in the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, saying:
“At the end of seven years, each of you should free his Hebrew brother who was sold to you and who has served you six years; you must set him free.” But your forefathers did not listen or incline their ears to me.
And recently you yourselves turned around and did what was right in my eyes by proclaiming liberty to your fellow men, and you made a covenant before me in the house that bears my name.
But then you turned around and profaned my name by bringing back your male and female slaves whom you had freed according to their desire, and you forced them back into slavery.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah says: ‘You have not obeyed me in proclaiming liberty, each one to his brother and to his fellow man. So I will now proclaim liberty to you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to the sword, to pestilence, and to famine, and I will make you an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
And this is what will happen to the men who violated my covenant by not carrying out the words of the covenant that they made before me when they cut the calf in two and passed between the halves,
namely, the princes of Judah, the princes of Jerusalem, the court officials, the priests, and all the people of the land who passed between the halves of the calf:
I will hand them over to their enemies and to those seeking to take their lives, and their dead bodies will become food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth.
And I will give King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and his princes into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of those seeking to take their lives and into the hand of the armies of the king of Babylon, who are withdrawing from against you.’
“‘Here I will give the order,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and I will bring them back to this city, and they will fight against it and capture it and burn it with fire; and the cities of Judah I will make a wasteland, without an inhabitant.’”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, saying:
“Go to the house of the Reʹcha·bites and speak with them and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the dining rooms; then offer them wine to drink.”
So I took Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Jeremiah the son of Hab·az·zi·niʹah, his brothers, all his sons, and the entire house of the Reʹcha·bites
into the house of Jehovah. I brought them to the dining room of the sons of Haʹnan the son of Ig·da·liʹah, a man of the true God, which was next to the dining room of the princes that was above the dining room of Ma·a·seiʹah the son of Shalʹlum the doorkeeper.
Then I put cups and goblets full of wine before the men of the house of the Reʹcha·bites and said to them: “Drink wine.”
But they said: “We will not drink wine, because Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab, our forefather, gave us this command, ‘Neither you nor your sons must ever drink wine.
And you must not build a house, sow seed, or plant or obtain a vineyard. Instead, you must always dwell in tents, so that you may live for a long time in the land where you are residing as foreigners.’
So we continue to obey the voice of Je·honʹa·dab the son of our forefather Reʹchab in all that he commanded us, by never drinking any wine—we, our wives, our sons, and our daughters.
And we do not build houses to dwell in, nor do we have vineyards or fields or seed.
We keep living in tents and obeying all that Je·honʹa·dab our forefather commanded us.
But when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came up against the land, we said, ‘Come, let us go into Jerusalem to escape the army of the Chal·deʹans and of the Syrians,’ and now we are living in Jerusalem.”
And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go and say to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: “Were you not continually urged to obey my words?” declares Jehovah.
“Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab commanded his descendants not to drink wine, and they have carried out his words by not drinking it to this day, thus obeying the order of their forefather. However, I have spoken to you again and again, but you have not obeyed me.
And I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, saying, ‘Turn back, please, each of you from your evil ways, and do what is right! Do not walk after other gods and serve them. Then you will keep dwelling in the land that I gave to you and your forefathers.’ But you did not incline your ear or listen to me.
The descendants of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab have carried out the order that their forefather gave them, but these people have not listened to me.”’”
“Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I am bringing on Judah and on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the calamity that I have warned them about, for I have spoken to them, but they would not listen, and I kept calling to them, but they would not answer.’”
And Jeremiah said to the household of the Reʹcha·bites: “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Because you have obeyed the order of your forefather Je·honʹa·dab and you continue to observe all his orders, doing exactly what he ordered you,
this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “There will never fail to be a descendant of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab to serve in my presence.”’”
Now in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“Take a scroll and write in it all the words that I have spoken to you against Israel and Judah and all the nations, from the first day I spoke to you in the days of Jo·siʹah to this day.
Perhaps when those of the house of Judah hear of all the calamity that I intend to bring on them, they may turn back from their evil ways, so that I may forgive their error and their sin.”
Jeremiah then called Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, and Jeremiah dictated all the words that Jehovah had spoken to him, and Barʹuch wrote them in the scroll.
Then Jeremiah commanded Barʹuch: “I am confined and unable to enter the house of Jehovah.
So you are the one who must go in and read aloud the words of Jehovah from the scroll that you wrote at my dictation. Read them in the hearing of the people at the house of Jehovah on the day of a fast; thus you will read them to all the people of Judah who come in from their cities.
Perhaps their request for favor will reach Jehovah, and they will turn back, each one from his evil ways, for great is the anger and the wrath that Jehovah has declared against this people.”
So Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah did all that Jeremiah the prophet had commanded him; he read aloud from the scroll the words of Jehovah at the house of Jehovah.
Now in the fifth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, in the ninth month, all the people in Jerusalem and all the people who came into Jerusalem from the cities of Judah proclaimed a fast before Jehovah.
Barʹuch then read aloud from the scroll the words of Jeremiah at the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan the copyist, in the upper courtyard, at the entrance of the new gate of the house of Jehovah, in the hearing of all the people.
When Mi·caiʹah the son of Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan heard all the words of Jehovah from the scroll,
he went down to the house of the king, to the secretary’s chamber. All the princes were sitting there: E·lishʹa·ma the secretary, De·laʹiah the son of She·maiʹah, El·naʹthan the son of Achʹbor, Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan, Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Han·a·niʹah, and all the other princes.
Mi·caiʹah told them all the words that he had heard when Barʹuch read from the scroll in the hearing of the people.
Then all the princes sent Je·huʹdi the son of Neth·a·niʹah the son of Shel·e·miʹah the son of Cushʹi to Barʹuch, saying: “Come and bring with you the scroll from which you read in the hearing of the people.” Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah took the scroll in his hand and went in to them.
They said to him: “Sit down, please, and read it aloud to us.” So Barʹuch read it to them.
Now as soon as they heard all the words, they looked at one another in dread, and they said to Barʹuch: “We must certainly tell the king all these words.”
And they asked Barʹuch: “Tell us, please, how you wrote all these words. Was it at his dictation?”
Barʹuch replied to them: “He dictated all these words to me, and I wrote them down with ink in this scroll.”
The princes said to Barʹuch: “Go and hide yourselves, you and Jeremiah, and do not let anyone know where you are.”
Then they went in to the king, to the courtyard, and deposited the scroll in the chamber of E·lishʹa·ma the secretary, and they told the king everything they had heard.
So the king sent Je·huʹdi out to get the scroll, and he brought it from the chamber of E·lishʹa·ma the secretary. Je·huʹdi began to read it in the hearing of the king and of all the princes standing by the king.
The king was sitting in the winter house, in the ninth month, with a fire burning in the brazier before him.
After Je·huʹdi had read three or four columns, the king would cut off that portion with the secretary’s knife and pitch it into the fire that was burning in the brazier, until the entire scroll ended up in the fire that was in the brazier.
And they felt no dread; neither the king nor all his servants who heard all these words ripped their garments apart.
Although El·naʹthan, De·laʹiah, and Gem·a·riʹah pleaded with the king not to burn the scroll, he did not listen to them.
Further, the king commanded Je·rahʹme·el the son of the king, Se·raiʹah the son of Azʹri·el, and Shel·e·miʹah the son of Abʹde·el to seize Barʹuch the secretary and Jeremiah the prophet, but Jehovah kept them concealed.
And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah after the king had burned up the scroll containing the words that Barʹuch had written at Jeremiah’s dictation, saying:
“Take another scroll and write on it all the same words that were on the first scroll, which King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah burned up.
And you should say against King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You have burned up this scroll and said, ‘Why have you written on it: “The king of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land and empty it of man and beast”?’
Therefore this is what Jehovah says against King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, ‘He will have no one to sit on the throne of David, and his dead body will be left exposed to the heat by day and the frost by night.
I will call him and his descendants and his servants to account for their error, and I will bring on them and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem and on the men of Judah all the calamity that I have spoken against them, but they did not listen.’”’”
Jeremiah then took another scroll and gave it to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, the secretary, and at Jeremiah’s dictation he wrote on it all the words of the scroll that King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah had burned in the fire. And many more words like those were added.
And King Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Jo·siʹah began to reign in place of Co·niʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, for King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon made him king in the land of Judah.
But he and his servants and the people of the land did not listen to the words of Jehovah spoken through Jeremiah the prophet.
And King Zed·e·kiʹah sent Je·huʹcal the son of Shel·e·miʹah and Zeph·a·niʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah the priest to Jeremiah the prophet, saying: “Please pray in our behalf to Jehovah our God.”
Jeremiah was moving about freely among the people, for they had not yet put him in prison.
Now Pharʹaoh’s army had set out from Egypt, and the Chal·deʹans who were besieging Jerusalem heard the report about them. So they withdrew from against Jerusalem.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the prophet, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘This is what you should say to the king of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me: “Look! The army of Pharʹaoh that is coming to assist you will have to go back to its land, Egypt.
And the Chal·deʹans will come back and fight against this city and capture it and burn it with fire.”
This is what Jehovah says, “Do not deceive yourselves by saying, ‘The Chal·deʹans will surely go away from against us,’ because they will not go away.
Even if you were to strike down the entire army of the Chal·deʹans who are fighting against you and only their wounded men were left, they would still rise up from their tents and burn this city with fire.”’”
When the Chal·deʹan army had withdrawn from against Jerusalem because of Pharʹaoh’s army,
Jeremiah set out from Jerusalem to the land of Benjamin to receive his portion there among his people.
But when he reached the Gate of Benjamin, the officer in charge of the guard, whose name was I·riʹjah the son of Shel·e·miʹah the son of Han·a·niʹah, seized Jeremiah the prophet and said: “You are deserting to the Chal·deʹans!”
But Jeremiah said: “It is not true! I am not deserting to the Chal·deʹans.” But he did not listen to him. So I·riʹjah arrested Jeremiah and brought him in to the princes.
The princes were furious with Jeremiah, and they beat him and imprisoned him in the house of Je·honʹa·than the secretary, which had been made into a prison.
Jeremiah was put into the dungeon, into the vaulted rooms, and he remained there many days.
Then King Zed·e·kiʹah sent for him, and the king secretly questioned him in his house. He asked, “Is there any word from Jehovah?” Jeremiah said, “There is!” and he continued, “You will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon!”
Jeremiah also said to King Zed·e·kiʹah: “How have I sinned against you and against your servants and against this people, so that you have put me into the prison?
Where, now, are your prophets who prophesied to you, ‘The king of Babylon will not come against you and against this land’?
Now listen, please, O my lord the king. May you grant, please, my request for favor. Do not send me back to the house of Je·honʹa·than the secretary, or I will die there.”
So King Zed·e·kiʹah ordered that Jeremiah be put in custody in the Courtyard of the Guard, and he was given a round loaf of bread daily from the street of the bakers until all the bread in the city was gone. And Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard.
Now Sheph·a·tiʹah the son of Matʹtan, Ged·a·liʹah the son of Pashʹhur, Juʹcal the son of Shel·e·miʹah, and Pashʹhur the son of Mal·chiʹjah heard the words that Jeremiah was speaking to all the people, saying:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘The one who remains in this city will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. But the one who surrenders to the Chal·deʹans will keep living and will have his life as a spoil and live.’
This is what Jehovah says, ‘This city will surely be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it.’”
The princes said to the king: “Please have this man put to death, for this is how he is weakening the morale of the soldiers who are left in this city, as well as that of all the people, by speaking such words to them. For this man seeks, not the peace of this people, but their calamity.”
King Zed·e·kiʹah replied: “Look! He is in your hands, for the king cannot do anything to stop you.”
So they took Jeremiah and threw him into the cistern of Mal·chiʹjah the son of the king, which was in the Courtyard of the Guard. They let Jeremiah down by ropes. Now there was no water in the cistern, only mud, and Jeremiah began to sink down into the mud.
Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an, a eunuch in the king’s house, heard that they had put Jeremiah into the cistern. Now the king was sitting in the Gate of Benjamin,
so Eʹbed-melʹech went out of the king’s house and spoke to the king, saying:
“O my lord the king, what these men have done to Jeremiah the prophet is evil! They have thrown him into the cistern, and he will die there because of the famine, for there is no bread left in the city.”
Then the king commanded Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an: “Take  men with you from here, and pull Jeremiah the prophet up out of the cistern before he dies.”
So Eʹbed-melʹech took the men with him and went into the king’s house to a place beneath the treasury, and they took from there some worn-out rags and worn-out pieces of cloth and let them down by ropes to Jeremiah in the cistern.
Then Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an said to Jeremiah: “Please put the rags and the pieces of cloth between your armpits and the ropes.” Jeremiah did so,
and they drew Jeremiah out with the ropes and pulled him up out of the cistern. And Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard.
King Zed·e·kiʹah sent for Jeremiah the prophet to come to him at the third entrance, which is in the house of Jehovah, and the king said to Jeremiah: “I have something to ask of you. Do not hide anything from me.”
Jeremiah then said to Zed·e·kiʹah: “If I tell you, you will certainly put me to death. And if I give you advice, you will not listen to me.”
So King Zed·e·kiʹah secretly swore to Jeremiah, saying: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who has given us this life, I will not put you to death, and I will not hand you over to these men who are seeking to take your life.”
Jeremiah then said to Zed·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘If you surrender to the princes of the king of Babylon, your life will be spared, and this city will not be burned with fire, and you and your household will be spared.
But if you will not surrender to the princes of the king of Babylon, this city will be handed over to the Chal·deʹans, and they will burn it with fire, and you will not escape out of their hand.’”
Then King Zed·e·kiʹah said to Jeremiah: “I am afraid of the Jews who have deserted to the Chal·deʹans, for if I am handed over to them, they may deal cruelly with me.”
But Jeremiah said: “You will not be handed over to them. Obey, please, the voice of Jehovah in what I am telling you, and it will go well with you, and you will continue to live.
But if you refuse to surrender, this is what Jehovah has revealed to me:
Look! All the women remaining in the house of the king of Judah are being brought out to the princes of the king of Babylon, and they are saying,
And all your wives and your sons they are bringing out to the Chal·deʹans, and you will not escape out of their hand, but you will be seized by the king of Babylon, and because of you this city will be burned with fire.”
Zed·e·kiʹah then said to Jeremiah: “Do not let anyone know about these things, so that you do not die.
And if the princes hear that I have spoken with you and they come and say to you, ‘Tell us, please, what you said to the king. Do not hide anything from us, and we will not put you to death. What did the king say to you?’
you must answer them, ‘I was making a request of the king, that he not send me back to the house of Je·honʹa·than to die there.’”
In time all the princes came in to Jeremiah and questioned him. He told them everything that the king had commanded him to say. So they said no more to him, for no one had heard the conversation.
Until the day that Jerusalem was captured, Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard; he was still there when Jerusalem was captured.
In the ninth year of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, in the tenth month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and all his army came to Jerusalem, and they besieged it.
In the th year of Zed·e·kiʹah, in the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, they broke through the city wall.
And all the princes of the king of Babylon went in and sat down in the Middle Gate, namely, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Samʹgar, Neʹbo-sarʹse·chim the Rabʹsa·ris, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Rabʹmag, and all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.
When King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and all the soldiers saw them, they fled, going out of the city by night by way of the king’s garden, through the gate between the double wall, and they continued by the way of the Arʹa·bah.
But the Chal·deʹan army chased after them, and they overtook Zed·e·kiʹah in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho. They captured him and brought him up to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, where he passed sentence on him.
The king of Babylon had the sons of Zed·e·kiʹah slaughtered before his eyes there at Ribʹlah, and the king of Babylon had all the nobles of Judah slaughtered.
Then he blinded the eyes of Zed·e·kiʹah, after which he bound him with copper fetters to bring him to Babylon.
The Chal·deʹans then burned down the king’s house and the houses of the people, and they tore down the walls of Jerusalem.
Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile to Babylon the rest of the people who were left in the city, the deserters who had defected to him, and anyone who remained.
But Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard left in the land of Judah some of the poorest people, those who had nothing at all. On that day he also gave them vineyards and fields to work.
Now King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon gave Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard these orders concerning Jeremiah:
“Take him and look after him; do him no harm, and grant whatever he asks of you.”
So Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, Neb·u·shazʹban the Rabʹsa·ris, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Rabʹmag, and all the principal men of the king of Babylon sent
and had Jeremiah taken out of the Courtyard of the Guard and handed him over to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan to be brought to his house. So he lived among the people.
While Jeremiah was confined in the Courtyard of the Guard, the word of Jehovah came to him, saying:
“Go and tell Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Here I am fulfilling my words on this city for calamity and not for good, and in that day you will see it happen.”’
“‘But I will rescue you in that day,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and you will not be handed over to the men you fear.’
“‘For I will surely provide you with escape, and you will not fall by the sword. You will have your life as a spoil, because you trusted in me,’ declares Jehovah.”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah after Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard let him go free from Raʹmah. He had taken him there bound with handcuffs, and he was among all the exiles of Jerusalem and of Judah who were being deported to Babylon.
Then the chief of the guard took Jeremiah and said to him: “Jehovah your God foretold this calamity against this place,
and Jehovah has brought it about just as he said, because you people sinned against Jehovah and did not obey his voice. That is why this has happened to you.
Now I am releasing you today from the handcuffs that were on your hands. If it seems good to you to come with me to Babylon, come, and I will look after you. But if you do not want to come with me to Babylon, do not come. See! The entire land is before you. Go wherever you choose.”
While Jeremiah still had not turned back, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan said: “Return to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, whom the king of Babylon has appointed over the cities of Judah, and stay with him among the people; or go wherever you choose.”
So Jeremiah went to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam at Mizʹpah and stayed with him among the people who were left in the land.
In time all the army chiefs who were in the field with their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam over the land and that he had appointed him over the men, women, and children from the poor people of the land who had not been deported to Babylon.
So they came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. They were Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, Jo·haʹnan and Jonʹa·than the sons of Ka·reʹah, Se·raiʹah the son of Tan·huʹmeth, the sons of Eʹphai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, and Jez·a·niʹah the son of the Ma·acʹa·thite, together with their men.
Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan swore an oath to them and to their men, saying: “Do not be afraid of serving the Chal·deʹans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will go well with you.
As for me, I will stay in Mizʹpah to represent you to the Chal·deʹans who come to us. But you should gather wine, summer fruits, and oil and put them in your storage containers and settle in the cities that you have taken over.”
And all the Jews who were in Moʹab, Amʹmon, and Eʹdom, as well as those who were in all the other lands, also heard that the king of Babylon had let a remnant stay in Judah and that he had appointed over them Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan.
So all the Jews began returning from all the places to which they had been dispersed, and they came into the land of Judah, to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. And they gathered wine and summer fruits in very great quantity.
Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were in the field came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah.
They said to him: “Do you not know that Baʹa·lis, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, has sent Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah to kill you?” But Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam did not believe them.
Then Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah secretly told Ged·a·liʹah in Mizʹpah: “I want to go and strike down Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, and no one will know. Why should he kill you, and why should all the people of Judah who have gathered to you be scattered and the remnant of Judah perish?”
But Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam said to Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah: “Do not do this, for what you are saying concerning Ishʹma·el is a lie.”
In the seventh month Ishʹma·el son of Neth·a·niʹah son of E·lishʹa·ma, who was of the royal line and one of the principal men of the king, came with ten other men to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam at Mizʹpah. As they were eating a meal together in Mizʹpah,
Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and the ten men who were with him rose up and struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan with the sword. So he put to death the one whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land.
Ishʹma·el also struck down all the Jews who were with Ged·a·liʹah in Mizʹpah, as well as the Chal·deʹan soldiers who were there.
On the second day after Ged·a·liʹah had been put to death, before anyone knew about it,
there came  men from Sheʹchem, from Shiʹloh, and from Sa·marʹi·a. Their beards were shaved off, their garments were ripped apart, they had cut themselves, and they had grain offerings and frankincense in their hand to bring to the house of Jehovah.
So Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah went out from Mizʹpah to meet them, weeping as he walked along. When he encountered them, he said to them: “Come to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam.”
But when they came into the city, Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and his men slaughtered them and threw them into the cistern.
But there were ten men among them who said to Ishʹma·el: “Do not put us to death, for we have hidden stores of wheat, barley, oil, and honey in the field.” So he refrained from putting them to death along with their brothers.
Now Ishʹma·el threw all the carcasses of the men he had killed into a great cistern, the one that King Aʹsa had made because of King Baʹa·sha of Israel. This was the cistern that Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah filled with the slain men.
Ishʹma·el took captive all the rest of the people in Mizʹpah, including the daughters of the king and all the people left in Mizʹpah, whom Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard had put in the custody of Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam. Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah took them captive and went off to cross over to the Amʹmon·ites.
When Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were with him heard about all the evil that Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah had done,
they took all the men and went off to fight against Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, and they found him by the great waters in Gibʹe·on.
All the people who were with Ishʹma·el rejoiced when they saw Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs with him.
Then all the people whom Ishʹma·el had taken captive from Mizʹpah turned around and went back with Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah.
But Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and eight of his men escaped from Jo·haʹnan and went to the Amʹmon·ites.
Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were with him took with them the rest of the people from Mizʹpah, those whom they had rescued from Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah after he had struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam. They brought the men, the soldiers, the women, the children, and the court officials back from Gibʹe·on.
So they went and stayed in the lodging place of Chimʹham next to Bethʹle·hem, intending to go on into Egypt
because of the Chal·deʹans. For they had become afraid of them, since Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah had struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam, whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land.
Then all the army chiefs, and Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, Jez·a·niʹah the son of Ho·shaiʹah, and all the people, from the least to the greatest, approached
and said to Jeremiah the prophet: “Hear, please, our request for favor, and pray in our behalf to Jehovah your God, in behalf of all this remnant, for just a few of many are left, as you can see.
May Jehovah your God tell us the way we should walk and what we should do.”
Jeremiah the prophet replied to them: “I have heard you, and I am praying to Jehovah your God according to your request; and every word that Jehovah answers you, I will tell you. I will not hold back a word from you.”
They replied to Jeremiah: “May Jehovah be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not do exactly as Jehovah your God instructs us through you.
Whether good or bad, we will obey the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we are sending you, so that it may go well with us because we obey the voice of Jehovah our God.”
Now ten days later the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah.
So he called for Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and for all the army chiefs who were with him and for all the people, from the least to the greatest.
He said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, to whom you sent me to present your request for favor before him:
‘If you will indeed remain in this land, then I will build you up and not tear you down, and I will plant you and not uproot you, for I will feel regret over the calamity I have caused you.
Do not be afraid because of the king of Babylon, whom you fear.’
And I will show you mercy, and he will have mercy on you and return you to your own land.
“‘But if you say, “No, we will not remain in this land!” and you disobey the voice of Jehovah your God
by saying, “No, we will go instead to the land of Egypt, where we will not see war or hear the sound of the horn or hunger for bread; there is where we will live,”
then hear the word of Jehovah, O remnant of Judah. This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “If you are absolutely determined to go to Egypt and you go there to reside,
then the very sword you are afraid of will catch up with you there in the land of Egypt, and the very famine you fear will follow after you to Egypt, and there you will die.
And all the men who are determined to go to Egypt to reside there will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. None of them will survive or escape the calamity that I will bring on them.”’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Just as my anger and my wrath were poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so my wrath will be poured out on you if you go to Egypt, and you will become a curse, an object of horror, a malediction, and a reproach, and you will never again see this place.’
“Jehovah has spoken against you, O remnant of Judah. Do not go to Egypt. You should know for a certainty that I have warned you today
that your error will cost you your lives. For you sent me to Jehovah your God, saying, ‘Pray in our behalf to Jehovah our God, and tell us everything that Jehovah our God says, and we will do it.’
And I told you today, but you will not obey the voice of Jehovah your God or do anything he sent me to tell you.
Therefore, know for a certainty that by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence you will die in the place where you desire to go and reside.”
When Jeremiah had finished speaking to all the people all these words from Jehovah their God, every single word that Jehovah their God had sent him to tell them,
Az·a·riʹah the son of Ho·shaiʹah, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, and all the presumptuous men said to Jeremiah: “What you are saying is a lie! Jehovah our God has not sent you to say, ‘Do not go to Egypt to reside there.’
But Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah is inciting you against us to hand us over to the Chal·deʹans, to put us to death or to take us into exile in Babylon.”
So Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs and all the people disobeyed the voice of Jehovah to remain in the land of Judah.
Instead, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs took with them all the remnant of Judah who had returned to reside in the land of Judah from all the nations where they had been dispersed.
They took the men, the women, the children, the daughters of the king, and everyone whom Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard had left with Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, as well as Jeremiah the prophet and Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah.
And they went into the land of Egypt, for they did not obey the voice of Jehovah, and they went as far as Tahʹpan·hes.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah in Tahʹpan·hes, saying:
“Take in your hand large stones, and hide them in the mortar in the brick terrace at the entrance of the house of Pharʹaoh in Tahʹpan·hes, with the Jewish men looking on.
Then say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Here I am sending for Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and I will place his throne right above these stones that I have hidden, and he will extend his royal tent over them.
And he will come in and strike the land of Egypt. Whoever is meant for deadly plague will be for deadly plague, and whoever is meant for captivity will be for captivity, and whoever is meant for the sword will be for the sword.
And I will set the houses of the gods of Egypt on fire, and he will burn them and lead them captive. He will wrap the land of Egypt around himself just as a shepherd wraps himself in his garment, and he will depart from there in peace.
And he will break to pieces the pillars of Beth-sheʹmesh in the land of Egypt, and he will burn the houses of the gods of Egypt with fire.”’”
The word that came to Jeremiah for all the Jews living in the land of Egypt, those living in Migʹdol, Tahʹpan·hes, Noph, and the land of Pathʹros, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘You have seen all the calamity that I brought on Jerusalem and on all the cities of Judah, and today they are in ruins, without an inhabitant.
It is because of the evil things that they did to offend me by going and making sacrifices and serving other gods whom they had not known, neither you nor your forefathers.
I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, saying: “Please do not do this detestable thing that I hate.”
But they did not listen or incline their ear to turn back from their evil by not making sacrifices to other gods.
So my wrath and my anger were poured out and burned in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, and they became a ruin and a wasteland, as they are today.’
“And now this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Why are you causing a great calamity to yourselves, so that every man and woman, child and infant, will perish from Judah, leaving you without a remnant?
Why should you offend me with the works of your hands by sacrificing to other gods in the land of Egypt where you have gone to reside? You will perish and become an object of cursing and a reproach among all the nations of the earth.
Have you forgotten the wicked deeds of your forefathers and the wicked deeds of the kings of Judah and the wicked deeds of their wives, as well as your own wicked deeds and the wicked deeds of your wives, that were done in the land of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
Down to this day they have not humbled themselves, they have shown no fear, nor have they walked in my law and my statutes that I set before you and your forefathers.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am determined to bring calamity on you, to destroy all Judah.
And I will take the remnant of Judah who were determined to go to the land of Egypt to reside there, and they will all perish in the land of Egypt. They will fall by the sword and perish by the famine; from the least to the greatest, they will die by the sword and by famine. And they will become a curse, an object of horror, a malediction, and a reproach.
I will punish those dwelling in the land of Egypt just as I punished Jerusalem, with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence.
And the remnant of Judah who have gone to reside in the land of Egypt will not escape or survive to return to the land of Judah. They will long to return and dwell there, but they will not return, except for a few escapees.’”
All the men who knew that their wives had been making sacrifices to other gods and all the wives who were standing there, who formed a large group, and all the people who were living in the land of Egypt, in Pathʹros, answered Jeremiah:
“We will not listen to the word that you have spoken to us in the name of Jehovah.
Instead, we will surely carry out every word that our mouths have spoken, to make sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her, just as we, our forefathers, our kings, and our princes did in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem when we were satisfied with bread and were well-off, when we saw no calamity at all.
From the time we quit making sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, we have lacked everything and have perished by the sword and by the famine.”
The women added: “And when we were making sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, was it without the consent of our husbands that we made sacrificial cakes shaped in her image and we poured out drink offerings to her?”
Then Jeremiah said to all the people, to the men and their wives and to all the people who were speaking to him:
“The sacrifices that you, your forefathers, your kings, your princes, and the people of the land made in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem—Jehovah remembered them and they came up into his heart!
Finally Jehovah could no longer put up with your evil practices and the detestable things you had done, and your land became a devastated place, an object of horror and cursing, without an inhabitant, as it is today.
It is because you have made these sacrifices and because you have sinned against Jehovah by not obeying the voice of Jehovah and following his law, his statutes, and his reminders that this calamity has come upon you, as is the case today.”
Jeremiah continued to say to all the people and to all the women: “Hear the word of Jehovah, all you of Judah who are in the land of Egypt.
This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘What you and your wives have spoken with your mouths, you have fulfilled with your hands, for you said: “We will surely carry out our vows to make sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her.” You women will surely carry out your vows and perform your vows.’
“Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, all you of Judah who are living in the land of Egypt: ‘“Here I swear by my own great name,” says Jehovah, “that my name will no longer be called on in an oath by any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt who says, ‘As surely as the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is alive!’
Now I am watching over them to bring calamity and not something good; all the men of Judah in the land of Egypt will perish by the sword and by the famine, until they cease to exist.
Only a few will escape the sword and return from the land of Egypt to the land of Judah. Then all the remnant of Judah who came to the land of Egypt to reside there will know whose word has come true, mine or theirs!”’”
“‘And this is the sign for you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that I will punish you in this place, so that you will know that my words promising calamity against you will surely come true.
This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am giving Pharʹaoh Hophʹra, the king of Egypt, into the hand of his enemies and of those seeking to take his life, just as I gave King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, who was his enemy and who sought to take his life.”’”
This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah when he wrote in a book these words dictated by Jeremiah in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning you, Barʹuch,
‘You have said: “Woe to me, for Jehovah has added grief to my pain! I am weary from my groaning, and I have found no resting-place.”’
“You should say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Look! What I have built up I am tearing down, and what I have planted I am uprooting—the entire land.
But you are seeking great things for yourself. Stop seeking such things.”’
This is the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations:
For Egypt, concerning the army of Pharʹaoh Neʹcho the king of Egypt, who was along the Eu·phraʹtes River and was defeated at Carʹche·mish by King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah:
“Prepare your bucklers and large shields,
Harness the horses and mount, you horsemen.
‘Why do I see them terror-stricken?
‘The swift cannot flee, and the warriors cannot escape.
Who is this coming up like the Nile River,
Egypt comes up just like the Nile River,
Go up, you horses!
“That day belongs to the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, the day of vengeance for taking revenge on his adversaries. And the sword will devour and satisfy itself and take its fill of their blood, for the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, has a sacrifice in the land of the north by the Eu·phraʹtes River.
Go up to Gilʹe·ad to get balsam,
The nations have heard your dishonor,
This is the word that Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah the prophet regarding the coming of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon to strike down the land of Egypt:
“Declare it in Egypt, proclaim it in Migʹdol.
Why have your powerful men been swept away?
In great numbers they are stumbling and falling.
There they have proclaimed,
‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies,
Prepare your baggage for exile,
Egypt is like a good-looking heifer,
Even her hired soldiers in her midst are like fattened calves,
‘Her sound is like that of a slithering serpent,
They will cut down her forest,’ declares Jehovah, ‘though it seemed impenetrable.
The daughter of Egypt will be put to shame.
“Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Now I am turning my attention to Aʹmon from No, to Pharʹaoh, to Egypt, to her gods, and to her kings—yes, to Pharʹaoh and all those trusting in him.’
“‘And I will hand them over to those seeking to take their life, to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and his servants. But afterward she will be inhabited as in times past,’ declares Jehovah.
‘As for you, do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,
So do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I am with you.
This is the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Phi·lisʹtines, before Pharʹaoh struck down Gazʹa.
This is what Jehovah says:
At the sound of the pounding hooves of his stallions,
Because the day that is coming will destroy all the Phi·lisʹtines;
Baldness will come to Gazʹa.
Ah! The sword of Jehovah!
How can it be quiet
For Moʹab, this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says:
They no longer praise Moʹab.
There is the sound of an outcry from Hor·o·naʹim,
Moʹab has been broken down.
On the ascent of Luʹhith they weep continually as they climb.
Flee, escape for your lives!
Because you trust in your works and in your treasures,
The destroyer will come in on every city,
Set up a marker for Moʹab,
Cursed is the one who carries out the mission of Jehovah neglectfully!
The Moʹab·ites have been undisturbed since their youth,
“‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when I will send men to overturn them. They will turn them over and empty out their vessels, and they will smash their large jars to pieces.
And the Moʹab·ites will be ashamed of Cheʹmosh, just as the house of Israel is ashamed of Bethʹel, which was their confidence.
How dare you say: “We are mighty warriors, ready for battle”?’
‘Moʹab has been destroyed,
The disaster on the Moʹab·ites is coming soon,
All those around them will have to sympathize with them,
Come down from your glory,
Stand by the road and watch, inhabitant of A·roʹer.
Moʹab has been put to shame and struck with terror.
“Judgment has come to the level land, against Hoʹlon, Jaʹhaz, and Mephʹa·ath;
against Diʹbon, Neʹbo, and Beth-dib·la·thaʹim;
against Kir·i·a·thaʹim, Beth-gaʹmul, and Beth-meʹon;
against Keʹri·oth and Bozʹrah; and against all the cities of the land of Moʹab, those far and near.
‘The strength of Moʹab has been cut down;
‘Make him drunk, for he has exalted himself against Jehovah.
Was Israel not an object of ridicule to you?
Leave the cities and live on the crag, inhabitants of Moʹab,
“We have heard about the pride of Moʹab—he is very haughty—
“‘I know his fury,’ declares Jehovah,
That is why I will wail over Moʹab,
With more than the weeping for Jaʹzer,
Rejoicing and joyfulness have been removed from the orchard
“‘There is an outcry from Heshʹbon clear to E·le·aʹleh.
I will cause to cease from Moʹab,’ declares Jehovah,
That is why my heart will moan for Moʹab like a flute,
For every head is bald,
“‘On all the roofs of Moʹab
‘How she is terrified! Wail!
“For this is what Jehovah says:
The towns will be captured,
“‘And Moʹab will be annihilated from being a people,
Terror and the pit and the trap are before you,
‘Anyone fleeing the terror will fall into the pit,
‘In the shadow of Heshʹbon, those fleeing stand powerless.
‘Woe to you, O Moʹab!
But I will gather the captives of Moʹab in the final part of the days,’ declares Jehovah.
For the Amʹmon·ites, this is what Jehovah says:
“‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah,
‘Wail, O Heshʹbon, for Aʹi has been destroyed!
Why do you brag about the valleys,
“‘Here I am bringing something dreadful on you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,
“‘But afterward I will gather the captives of the Amʹmon·ites,’ declares Jehovah.”
For Eʹdom, this is what Jehovah of armies says:
Flee, turn back!
If grape gatherers came in to you,
But I will strip Eʹsau bare.
Leave your fatherless children,
For this is what Jehovah says: “Look! If those not sentenced to drink the cup must drink it, should you be left completely unpunished? You will not be left unpunished, for you must drink it.”
“For by myself I have sworn,” declares Jehovah, “that Bozʹrah will become an object of horror, a reproach, a devastation, and a curse; and all her cities will become perpetual ruins.”
I have heard a report from Jehovah,
“For look! I have made you insignificant among the nations,
The shuddering you caused has deceived you,
“And Eʹdom must become an object of horror. Everyone passing along by her will stare in horror and whistle on account of all her plagues.
Just as in the overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and of their neighboring towns,” Jehovah says, “no one will dwell there, and no man will settle there.
“Look! Someone will come up against the secure pastures like a lion from the dense thickets along the Jordan, but in a moment I will make him run away from her. And I will appoint over her the chosen one. For who is like me, and who will challenge me? What shepherd can stand before me?
Therefore hear, O men, the decision that Jehovah has made against Eʹdom and what he has thought out against the inhabitants of Teʹman:
At the sound of their falling, the earth has quaked.
Look! Just like an eagle he will ascend and swoop down,
For Damascus:
Damascus has lost courage.
How is it that the city of praise has not been abandoned,
For her young men will fall in her public squares,
“I will set the wall of Damascus on fire,
For Keʹdar and the kingdoms of Haʹzor, which King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon struck down, this is what Jehovah says:
Their tents and their flocks will be taken,
“Flee, go far away!
“Rise up, go up against the nation that is at peace,
Their camels will become plunder,
“And Haʹzor will become a lair of jackals,
This is the word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Eʹlam in the beginning of the reign of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Here I am breaking the bow of Eʹlam, the source of their mightiness.
I will bring in on Eʹlam the four winds from the four extremities of the heavens, and I will scatter them to all these winds. There will not be a nation to which the dispersed ones of Eʹlam will not go.’”
“I will shatter the Eʹlam·ites before their enemies and before those seeking to take their life; and I will bring calamity on them, my burning anger,” declares Jehovah. “And I will send the sword after them until I have exterminated them.”
“And I will set my throne in Eʹlam, and I will destroy from there the king and the princes,” declares Jehovah.
“But in the final part of the days, I will gather the captives of Eʹlam,” declares Jehovah.
The word that Jehovah spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chal·deʹans, through Jeremiah the prophet:
“Declare it among the nations and proclaim it.
For a nation has come against her from the north.
“In those days and at that time,” declares Jehovah, “the people of Israel and the people of Judah will come together. They will weep as they walk, and together they will seek Jehovah their God.
They will ask the way to Zion, with their faces turned in that direction, saying, ‘Come and let us join ourselves to Jehovah in an everlasting covenant that will not be forgotten.’
My people have become a flock of lost sheep. Their own shepherds caused them to stray. They led them away onto the mountains, roaming from mountain to hill. They have forgotten their resting-place.
All those finding them have devoured them, and their enemies have said, ‘We are not guilty, because they sinned against Jehovah, against the dwelling place of righteousness and the hope of their forefathers, Jehovah.’”
“Flee out of the midst of Babylon,
For here I am raising up and bringing against Babylon
Chal·deʹa will become a spoil.
“For you kept rejoicing, you kept exulting
Your mother has been put to shame.
Because of the indignation of Jehovah she will not be inhabited;
Come against Babylon in battle formation on every side,
Shout a war cry against her on every side.
Cut off the sower from Babylon
“The people of Israel are scattered sheep. Lions have dispersed them. First the king of As·syrʹi·a devoured them; then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon gnawed on their bones.
Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I will deal with the king of Babylon and with his land in the same way that I dealt with the king of As·syrʹi·a.
And I will bring Israel back to his pasture, and he will graze on Carʹmel and on Baʹshan, and on the mountains of Eʹphra·im and of Gilʹe·ad he will be satisfied.’”
“In those days and at that time,” declares Jehovah,
“Go up against the land of Mer·a·thaʹim and against the inhabitants of Peʹkod.
There is the sound of war in the land,
How the forge hammer of all the earth has been cut down and broken!
I have laid a snare for you, and you have been caught, O Babylon,
Jehovah has opened his storehouse,
Come against her from distant places.
Massacre all her young bulls;
There is the sound of those fleeing,
Summon archers against Babylon,
So her young men will fall in her public squares,
“Look! I am against you, O defiant one,” declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,
You, O defiant one, will stumble and fall,
This is what Jehovah of armies says:
But their Repurchaser is strong.
“There is a sword against the Chal·deʹans,” declares Jehovah,
There is a sword against the empty talkers, and they will act foolishly.
There is a sword against their horses and their war chariots,
There is a devastation on her waters, and they will be dried up.
Therefore, the desert creatures will dwell with the howling animals,
“Just as with God’s overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and of their neighboring towns,” declares Jehovah, “no one will dwell there, and no man will settle there.
Look! A people is coming in from the north;
Bow and javelin they wield.
The king of Babylon has heard the report about them,
“Look! Someone will come up against the secure pastures like a lion from the dense thickets along the Jordan, but in a moment I will make them run away from her. And I will appoint over her the chosen one. For who is like me, and who will challenge me? What shepherd can stand before me?
Therefore hear, O men, the decision that Jehovah has made against Babylon and what he has thought out against the land of the Chal·deʹans.
At the sound of Babylon’s capture, the earth will quake,
This is what Jehovah says:
I will send winnowers to Babylon,
Let the archer not bend his bow.
And they will fall slain in the land of the Chal·deʹans,
For Israel and Judah are not widowed from their God, from Jehovah of armies.
Flee out of the midst of Babylon,
Babylon has been a golden cup in the hand of Jehovah;
Suddenly Babylon has fallen and is broken.
“We tried to heal Babylon, but she could not be healed.
Jehovah has brought about justice for us.
“Polish the arrows; take up the circular shields.
Lift up a signal against the walls of Babylon.
“O woman who resides on many waters,
Jehovah of armies has sworn by himself,
He is the Maker of the earth by his power,
When he makes his voice heard,
Every man acts unreasonably and without knowledge.
They are a delusion, a work of mockery.
The Share of Jacob is not like these things,
“You are a war club for me, a weapon for battle,
With you I will smash the horse and its rider.
With you I will smash man and woman.
With you I will smash shepherd and his flock.
And I will repay Babylon and all the inhabitants of Chal·deʹa
“Here I am against you, O destructive mountain,” declares Jehovah,
“People will not take from you a cornerstone or a foundation stone,
“Lift up a signal in the land.
Appoint against her the nations,
And the earth will quake and tremble,
The warriors of Babylon have quit fighting.
One courier runs to meet another courier,
That the fords have been seized,
For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says:
“King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon has devoured me;
‘May the violence done to me and to my person come upon Babylon!’ says the inhabitant of Zion.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says:
And Babylon will become piles of stones,
All together they will roar just like young lions.
“When they are inflamed, I will set out their banquet and make them drunk,
“I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter,
“O how Sheʹshach has been captured,
The sea has come up over Babylon.
Her cities have become an object of horror, a waterless land and a desert.
I will turn my attention to Bel in Babylon,
Get out of her midst, my people!
Do not be fainthearted or afraid about the report to be heard in the land.
Therefore look! the days are coming
The heavens and the earth and everything in them
“Not only did Babylon cause the slain of Israel to fall
You who escape the sword, keep going, do not stand still!
“We have been put to shame, for we have heard taunts.
“Therefore look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah,
Zed·e·kiʹah was  years old when he became king, and he reigned for  years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ha·muʹtal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libʹnah.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that Je·hoiʹa·kim had done.
It was because of Jehovah’s anger that these things took place in Jerusalem and in Judah, until he cast them out of his sight. And Zed·e·kiʹah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
In the ninth year of Zed·e·kiʹah’s reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came with all his army against Jerusalem. They camped against it and built a siege wall all around it.
And the city was under siege until the th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah.
In the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, the famine was severe in the city, and there was no food for the people of the land.
Finally the city wall was broken through, and all the soldiers fled from the city by night through the gate between the double wall near the king’s garden, while the Chal·deʹans were surrounding the city; and they continued by the way of the Arʹa·bah.
But the Chal·deʹan army pursued the king, and they overtook Zed·e·kiʹah in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho, and all his troops were scattered from his side.
Then they seized the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, and he passed sentence on him.
And the king of Babylon slaughtered Zed·e·kiʹah’s sons before his eyes, and he also slaughtered all the princes of Judah there at Ribʹlah.
Then the king of Babylon blinded Zed·e·kiʹah’s eyes, bound him with copper fetters, brought him to Babylon, and kept him imprisoned until the day of his death.
In the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, that is, in the th year of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, who was an attendant of the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem.
He burned down the house of Jehovah, the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; he also burned down every large house.
And the walls surrounding Jerusalem were pulled down by the entire Chal·deʹan army that was with the chief of the guard.
Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile some of the lowly people and the rest of the people who were left in the city. He also took the deserters who had defected to the king of Babylon as well as the rest of the master craftsmen.
But Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard left some of the poorest people of the land to serve as vinedressers and as compulsory laborers.
And the Chal·deʹans broke into pieces the copper pillars of the house of Jehovah and the carriages and the copper Sea that were in the house of Jehovah, and they carried all the copper away to Babylon.
They also took the cans, the shovels, the extinguishers, the bowls, the cups, and all the copper utensils used in the temple service.
The chief of the guard took the basins, the fire holders, the bowls, the cans, the lampstands, the cups, and the bowls that were of genuine gold and silver.
As for the two pillars, the Sea, the  copper bulls under the Sea, and the carriages that King Solʹo·mon had made for the house of Jehovah, the copper of all these articles was beyond weighing.
As for the pillars, each pillar was  cubits high, a measuring cord of  cubits could encircle it; its thickness was four fingerbreadths, and it was hollow.
And the capital on it was of copper; and the height of the one capital was five cubits; and the network and pomegranates all around on the capital were all made of copper. The second pillar was just like it, also the pomegranates.
There were  pomegranates on the sides; in all, there were  pomegranates around the network.
The chief of the guard also took Se·raiʹah the chief priest, Zeph·a·niʹah the second priest, and the three doorkeepers.
And he took from the city one court official who was the commissioner over the soldiers, seven close associates of the king who were found in the city, as well as the secretary of the chief of the army, the one mustering the people of the land, and  men of the common people of the land who were yet found in the city.
Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah.
The king of Babylon struck them down and put them to death at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath. Thus Judah went into exile from its land.
These are the people whom Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar took into exile: in the seventh year, , Jews.
In the th year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar,  people were taken from Jerusalem.
In the rd year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took Jews into exile,  people.
Then in the th year of the exile of King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah, in the th month, on the th day of the month, King Eʹvil-merʹo·dach of Babylon, in the year he became king, released King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah and brought him out of prison.
He spoke kindly with him and put his throne higher than the thrones of the other kings who were with him in Babylon.
So Je·hoiʹa·chin took off his prison garments, and he regularly ate before him all the days of his life.
A regular allowance of food was given him from the king of Babylon, day after day, until the day of his death, all the days of his life.
How she now sits all alone, the city that was full of people!
She weeps profusely during the night, and her tears cover her cheeks.
Judah has gone into exile under affliction and harsh slavery.
The roads to Zion are mourning, because no one is coming to the festival.
Her adversaries are now her master; her enemies are carefree.
How Jehovah has covered the daughter of Zion in the cloud of his anger!
Jehovah has swallowed up without compassion all the dwellings of Jacob.
In the heat of anger he has cut down all the strength of Israel.
He has bent his bow like an enemy; his right hand is poised as an adversary;
Jehovah has become like an enemy;
I am the man who has seen affliction because of the rod of his fury.
He has driven me out and makes me walk in darkness, not in light.
Indeed, he repeatedly brings his hand against me all day long.
He has worn away my flesh and my skin;
He has besieged me; he has surrounded me with bitter poison and hardship.
How the shining gold has grown dim, the fine gold!
As for the precious sons of Zion, who were weighed against refined gold,
Even jackals offer the udder to nurse their young,
The tongue of the nursing infant sticks to its palate because of thirst.
Those who used to eat delicacies lie famished in the streets.
Remember, O Jehovah, what has befallen us.
Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers, our houses to foreigners.
We have become orphans without a father; our mothers are like widows.
We must pay to drink our own water, and our own wood comes at a price.
Those pursuing us are at our neck;
In the th year, on the fifth day of the fourth month, while I was among the exiled people by the river Cheʹbar, the heavens were opened and I began to see visions of God.
On the fifth day of the month—that is, in the fifth year of the exile of King Je·hoiʹa·chin—
the word of Jehovah came to Ezekiel son of Buʹzi the priest by the river Cheʹbar in the land of the Chal·deʹans. There the hand of Jehovah came upon him.
As I was looking, I saw a tempestuous wind coming from the north, and there was a huge cloud and flashing fire surrounded by a bright light, and from the midst of the fire was something that looked like electrum.
Within it were what looked like four living creatures, and the appearance of each one was like that of a human.
Each one had four faces and four wings.
Their feet were straight, and the soles of their feet were like those of a calf, and they were shining like the glow of burnished copper.
They had human hands under their wings on all four sides, and the four of them had faces and wings.
Their wings were touching one another. They would not turn when they went; they would each go straight forward.
Their faces had this appearance: Each of the four had a man’s face with a lion’s face on the right, a bull’s face on the left, and each of the four had an eagle’s face.
That is how their faces were. Their wings were spread out above them. Each had two wings that were touching one another and two wings covering their bodies.
They would each go straight forward, going wherever the spirit would incline them to go. They would not turn as they went.
And the living creatures had the appearance of burning coals of fire, and something that looked like torches of bright fire was moving back and forth between the living creatures, and lightning was flashing out from the fire.
And when the living creatures would go forth and return, their movement had the appearance of flashes of lightning.
As I was watching the living creatures, I saw one wheel on the earth beside each of the living creatures with four faces.
The wheels and their structure appeared to glow like chrysʹo·lite, and the four of them looked alike. Their appearance and structure looked as though a wheel were within a wheel.
When they moved, they could go in any of the four directions without turning as they went.
Their rims were so high that they inspired awe, and the rims of all four were full of eyes all around.
Whenever the living creatures moved, the wheels would move along with them, and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels would also be lifted up.
They would go where the spirit inclined them to go, wherever the spirit went. The wheels would be lifted up together with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was also in the wheels.
When they moved, these would move; and when they stood still, these would stand still; and when they were lifted up from the earth, the wheels would be lifted up together with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was also in the wheels.
Over the heads of the living creatures was the likeness of an expanse that sparkled like awesome ice, stretched out above their heads.
Under the expanse their wings were straight, one to the other. Each one had two wings for covering one side of their bodies and two for covering the other side.
When I heard the sound of their wings, it was like a sound of rushing waters, like the sound of the Almighty. When they moved, it was like the sound of an army. When they stood still, they would let their wings down.
There was a voice above the expanse over their heads. (When they stood still, they would let their wings down.)
Above the expanse that was over their heads was what looked like a sapphire stone, and it resembled a throne. Sitting on the throne up above was someone whose appearance resembled that of a human.
I saw something glowing like electrum that was like a fire radiating from what appeared to be his waist and upward; and from his waist down, I saw something that resembled fire. There was a brilliance all around him
like that of a rainbow in a cloud on a rainy day. That was how the surrounding brilliant light appeared. It was like the appearance of the glory of Jehovah. When I saw it, I fell facedown and began to hear the voice of someone speaking.
He then said to me: “Son of man, stand up on your feet that I may speak with you.”
When he spoke to me, spirit came into me and made me stand up on my feet so that I could hear the One speaking to me.
He went on to say to me: “Son of man, I am sending you to the people of Israel, to rebellious nations that have rebelled against me. They and their forefathers have transgressed against me down to this very day.
I am sending you to sons who are defiant and hardhearted, and you must say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says.’
As for them, whether they listen or refuse to listen—for they are a rebellious house—they will certainly know that a prophet was among them.
“But you, son of man, do not be afraid of them, and do not be afraid of their words, although you are surrounded by briars and thorns and are dwelling among scorpions. Do not be afraid of their words, and do not be terrified by their faces, for they are a rebellious house.
You must speak my words to them, whether they listen or not, for they are a rebellious people.
“But you, son of man, listen to what I am telling you. Do not become rebellious like this rebellious house. Open your mouth and eat what I am giving you.”
When I looked, I saw a hand stretched out to me, and in it I saw a written scroll.
When he spread it out before me, it had writing on both front and back. Dirges and mourning and wailing were written on it.
Then he said to me: “Son of man, eat what is before you. Eat this scroll, and go, speak to the house of Israel.”
So I opened my mouth, and he made me eat this scroll.
He went on to say to me: “Son of man, eat this scroll that I am giving you, and fill your stomach with it.” So I began to eat it, and it was as sweet as honey in my mouth.
He said to me: “Son of man, go in among the house of Israel and speak my words to them.
For you are not being sent to a people who speak an unintelligible language or an unknown tongue, but to the house of Israel.
You are not being sent to many peoples speaking an unintelligible language or an unknown tongue, whose words you cannot understand. If I would send you to them, they would listen to you.
But the house of Israel will refuse to listen to you, for they do not want to listen to me. All those of the house of Israel are hardheaded and hardhearted.
Look! I have made your face exactly as hard as their faces and your forehead exactly as hard as their foreheads.
I have made your forehead like a diamond, harder than flint. Do not be afraid of them or be terrified by their faces, for they are a rebellious house.”
He went on to say to me: “Son of man, take to heart and listen to all my words that I speak to you.
Go in among the exiles of your people and speak to them. Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says,’ whether they listen or refuse to listen.”
A spirit then carried me along and I heard behind me a great rumbling sound that said: “May the glory of Jehovah be praised from his place.”
There was the sound of the wings of the living creatures as they were brushing against one another, and the sound of the wheels next to them, and the sound of a great rumbling.
And the spirit carried me along and took me, and I went in bitterness and in the rage of my spirit, and the hand of Jehovah rested strongly on me.
So I went to the exiled people at Tel-aʹbib, who were dwelling by the river Cheʹbar, and I stayed there where they were dwelling; and in a dazed condition, I stayed among them for seven days.
At the end of seven days the word of Jehovah came to me:
“Son of man, I have appointed you as a watchman to the house of Israel; and when you hear a word from my mouth, you must warn them from me.
When I say to someone wicked, ‘You will surely die,’ but you do not warn him, and you fail to speak in order to warn the wicked one to turn from his wicked course so that he may stay alive, he will die for his error because he is wicked, but I will ask his blood back from you.
But if you warn someone wicked and he does not turn back from his wickedness and from his wicked course, he will die for his error, but you will certainly save your own life.
But when someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, I will put a stumbling block before him and he will die. If you did not warn him, he will die for his sin and his righteous acts will not be remembered, but I will ask his blood back from you.
But if you have warned the righteous one not to sin, and he does not sin, he will surely keep alive because he was warned, and you will have saved your own life.”
The hand of Jehovah came upon me there, and he said to me: “Get up, go to the valley plain, and I will speak with you there.”
So I got up and went to the valley plain, and look! the glory of Jehovah was there, like the glory that I saw by the river Cheʹbar, and I fell facedown.
Then spirit entered into me and made me stand up on my feet, and he spoke to me and said:
As for you, son of man, they will put ropes on you and tie you with them so that you cannot go out among them.
And I will make your tongue stick to the roof of your mouth, and you will become mute, unable to reprove them, because they are a rebellious house.
But when I speak with you I will open your mouth, and you must say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says.’ Let the one listening listen, and let the one refusing to listen refuse, because they are a rebellious house.
“And you, son of man, take a brick and put it in front of you. Engrave on it a city—Jerusalem.
Lay siege to it, build a siege wall against it, raise up a siege rampart against it, set up camps against it, and surround it with battering rams.
Take an iron griddle and place it as an iron wall between you and the city. Then set your face against it, and it will be under siege; you are to besiege it. This is a sign to the house of Israel.
“Then you should lie on your left side and lay the guilt of the house of Israel on yourself. You will carry their guilt for the number of days that you lie on your side.
And I will impose on you  days, corresponding to the years of their guilt, and you will carry the guilt of the house of Israel.
And you must complete them.
And you will turn your face toward the siege of Jerusalem with your arm bared, and you must prophesy against it.
“Look! I will tie you with ropes so that you cannot turn from your one side to your other side until you have completed the days of your siege.
“And you should take wheat, barley, broad beans, lentils, millet, and spelt and put them in one container and make them into bread for yourself. For the number of the days that you are lying on your side,  days, you will eat it.
You will weigh out and eat  shekels of food per day. You will eat it at set times.
“And you will drink water by measure, a sixth of a hin. You will drink it at set times.
“You will eat it as you would a round barley loaf; you will bake it before their eyes, using dried human excrement as fuel.”
Jehovah went on to say: “This is how the Israelites will eat their bread—unclean—among the nations where I will disperse them.”
I then said: “Not that, Sovereign Lord Jehovah! From my youth until now, I have not been defiled by eating meat from an animal found dead or a torn animal, and no unclean meat has entered my mouth.”
So he said to me: “All right, I will allow you to use cattle manure instead of human excrement, and you will bake your bread over it.”
He then said to me: “Son of man, here I am cutting off the food supply in Jerusalem, and with great anxiety they will eat their bread ration by weight, and in horror they will drink their water ration by measure.
This will happen so that lacking bread and water, they may look in shock at one another and waste away because of their error.
“As for you, son of man, take a sharp sword for yourself to use as a barber’s razor. Shave your head and your beard, and then take scales to weigh and divide the hair into portions.
You will burn a third of it in the fire inside the city when the days of the siege are completed. Then you will take another third and strike it with the sword all around the city, and the last third you will scatter to the wind, and I will draw a sword to chase after them.
“You must also take a few strands of them and wrap them up in the folds of your garment.
And take some more of them and throw them into the fire and incinerate them. From this a fire will spread to all the house of Israel.
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘This is Jerusalem. I have set her in the middle of the nations, with lands all around her.
But she has rebelled against my judicial decisions and my statutes, acting more wickedly than the nations and the lands all around her. For they have rejected my judicial decisions, and they did not walk in my statutes.’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you were more troublesome than the nations all around you and you did not walk in my statutes or carry out my judicial decisions but, instead, you followed the judicial decisions of the nations all around you,
this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O city, and I myself will execute judgment in your midst before the eyes of the nations.
I will do in you what I have never done before, and the likes of which I will not do again, because of all your detestable practices.
“‘“So fathers among you will eat their sons, and sons will eat their fathers, and I will execute judgment among you and scatter all the rest of you in every direction.”’
“‘Therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘because it was my sanctuary that you defiled with all your disgusting idols and with all your detestable practices, I will also reject you; my eye will not feel sorry, and I will show no compassion.
A third of you will die by the pestilence or perish in your midst by famine. Another third will fall all around you by the sword. And I will scatter the last third in every direction, and I will draw a sword to chase after them.
Then my anger will come to an end, and my wrath against them will subside, and I will be satisfied. And they will have to know that I, Jehovah, have spoken in my insistence on exclusive devotion, when I have finished unleashing my wrath against them.
“‘I will make you a devastated place and an object of reproach among the surrounding nations and in the eyes of everyone passing by.
You will become an object of reproach and scorn, a warning example and a horror to the nations around you, when I execute judgment on you in anger and in wrath and with furious punishments. I, Jehovah, have spoken.
“‘I will send against them the deadly arrows of famine to destroy them. The arrows that I send will bring you to ruin. I will make the famine worse for you by cutting off your food supply.
I will send against you famine and vicious wild beasts, and they will bereave you of children. Pestilence and bloodshed will overwhelm you, and I will bring a sword against you. I, Jehovah, have spoken.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them.
You must say, ‘O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah: This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the mountains, to the hills, to the streams, and to the valleys: “Look! I will bring a sword against you, and I will destroy your high places.
Your altars will be demolished, your incense stands will be broken, and I will throw your slain ones down before your disgusting idols.
I will throw the carcasses of the people of Israel before their disgusting idols, and I will scatter your bones all around your altars.
In all the places where you dwell, the cities will be devastated and the high places will be demolished and will lie devastated. Your altars will be demolished and shattered, your disgusting idols will perish, your incense stands will be cut down, and your works will be wiped out.
And those slain will fall in your midst, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
“‘“But I will leave a remnant, for some of you will escape the sword among the nations when you are scattered throughout the lands.
And those who escape will remember me among the nations where they are taken captive. They will realize that I was brokenhearted over their unfaithful heart that turned away from me and at their eyes that are lusting after their disgusting idols. They will be ashamed of and loathe all the evil and detestable things they have done.
They will have to know that I am Jehovah and that my threats to bring this calamity on them were not empty.”’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Clap your hands and stamp your foot and bemoan all the evil and detestable things done by the house of Israel, for they will fall by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence.
The one far away will die by pestilence, the one nearby will fall by the sword, and whoever escapes these and is left remaining will die by famine; and I will fully unleash my wrath against them.
And you will have to know that I am Jehovah, when their slain lie among their disgusting idols, all around their altars, on every high hill, on all the mountaintops, under every luxuriant tree, and under the branches of big trees where they have made fragrant offerings to appease all their disgusting idols.
I will stretch out my hand against them and make the land desolate, and all their dwelling places will become more desolate than the wilderness near Dibʹlah. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“As for you, son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the land of Israel: ‘An end! The end has come upon the four corners of the land.
The end is now upon you, and I will unleash my anger against you, and I will judge you according to your ways and call you to account for all your detestable deeds.
My eye will not feel sorry for you; nor will I feel compassion, for I will bring upon you the results of your own ways, and you will suffer the consequences of your detestable deeds. And you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Look! A calamity, a unique calamity, is coming.
An end is coming; the end will come; it will rouse itself against you. Look! It is coming.
Your turn has come, you who inhabit the land. The time is coming, the day is near. There is confusion and not joyful shouting on the mountains.
“‘Very soon I will pour out my rage on you, and I will fully unleash my anger against you, and I will judge you according to your ways and call you to account for all your detestable deeds.
My eye will not feel sorry; nor will I feel compassion. I will bring on you the results of your ways, and you will suffer the consequences of your own detestable deeds. And you will have to know that I, Jehovah, am striking you.
“‘Look, the day! Look, it is coming! Your turn has come; the rod has blossomed and presumptuousness has sprouted.
Violence has grown into a rod of wickedness. Neither they nor their wealth nor their crowds nor their prominence will survive.
The time will come, the day will arrive. Let the buyer not rejoice, and let the seller not mourn, for there is wrath against their whole crowd.
For the seller will not return to what was sold, even if his life is spared, for the vision is against the entire multitude. No one will return, and because of his error, no one will preserve his life.
“‘They have blown the trumpet, and everyone is ready, but no one is going to the battle, because my wrath is against the whole multitude.
The sword is outside, and the pestilence and the famine are inside. Whoever is in the field will die by the sword, and famine and pestilence will consume those in the city.
Their survivors who manage to escape will go to the mountains, and like the doves of the valleys, each one will moan over his error.
All their hands will hang limp, and all their knees will drip with water.
They have put on sackcloth, and shuddering has seized them. Everyone will be put to shame, and every head will be bald.
“‘They will throw their silver into the streets, and their gold will become abhorrent to them. Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them in the day of Jehovah’s fury. They will not be satisfied, nor will they fill their stomachs, for it has become a stumbling block causing their error.
They took pride in the beauty of their ornaments, and they made with them their detestable images, their disgusting idols. That is why I will make it an abhorrent thing to them.
I will give it into the hand of the foreigners for plunder and to the wicked ones of the earth for spoil, and they will profane it.
“‘I will turn my face away from them, and they will profane my concealed place, and robbers will enter it and profane it.
“‘Make the chain, for the land is full of bloodstained judgment and the city is full of violence.
I will bring in the worst of the nations, and they will take possession of their houses, and I will put an end to the pride of the strong ones, and their sanctuaries will be profaned.
When their anguish comes, they will seek peace, but there will be none.
There will come disaster upon disaster, and one report after another, and people will seek a vision from a prophet, but the law will perish from a priest and advice from the elders.
The king will go into mourning, and the chieftain will be clothed with despair, and the hands of the people of the land will tremble in terror. I will treat them according to their ways, and I will judge them as they have judged. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
And in the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, when I was sitting in my house and the elders of Judah were sitting before me, the hand of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah took hold of me there.
As I watched, I saw a form similar to the appearance of fire; there was fire below what appeared to be his waist, and from his waist upward his appearance was bright, like the glow of electrum.
Then he stretched out what appeared to be a hand and took me by a tuft of hair of my head, and a spirit carried me between the earth and the heavens and brought me to Jerusalem by means of the visions from God, to the entrance of the inner gate that faces north, where the idolatrous symbol of jealousy that incites jealousy stood.
And look! the glory of the God of Israel was there, like the appearance that I had seen in the valley plain.
He then said to me: “Son of man, please raise your eyes toward the north.” So I raised my eyes toward the north, and there, north of the gate of the altar, was this symbol of jealousy in the entryway.
And he said to me: “Son of man, do you see what terrible, detestable things the house of Israel is doing here, things that make me go far away from my sanctuary? But you will see detestable things that are even more terrible.”
Then he brought me to the entrance of the courtyard, and when I looked, I saw a hole in the wall.
He said to me: “Son of man, please bore through the wall.” So I bored through the wall, and I saw an entryway.
He said to me: “Go in and see the evil, detestable things that they are doing here.”
So I went in and looked, and I saw all sorts of images of creeping things and loathsome beasts and all the disgusting idols of the house of Israel; they were carved on the wall all around.
And  of the elders of the house of Israel were standing before them, with Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Shaʹphan standing among them. Each one had his censer in his hand, and the perfumed cloud of incense was ascending.
He said to me: “Son of man, do you see what the elders of the house of Israel are doing in the darkness, each one in the inner rooms where his idols are displayed? For they are saying, ‘Jehovah is not seeing us. Jehovah has left the land.’”
And he went on to say to me: “You will see detestable things that are even more terrible that they are doing.”
So he brought me to the entrance of the north gate of the house of Jehovah, and there I saw women sitting and weeping over the god Tamʹmuz.
And he further said to me: “Do you see this, O son of man? You will see detestable things that are even more terrible than these.”
So he brought me to the inner courtyard of the house of Jehovah. There at the entrance of the temple of Jehovah, between the porch and the altar, were about  men with their backs to the temple of Jehovah and their faces to the east; they were bowing down to the sun in the east.
He said to me: “Son of man, do you see this? Is it a trivial thing for the house of Judah to do these detestable things, to fill the land with violence and keep offending me? Here they are thrusting out the branch to my nose.
So I will act in rage. My eye will not feel sorry; nor will I feel compassion. Even though they cry out loudly in my ears, I will not hear them.”
He then called out in my ears with a loud voice, saying: “Summon those who will bring punishment on the city, each one with his weapon for destruction in his hand!”
I saw six men coming from the direction of the upper gate that faces north, each with his weapon for smashing in his hand; and there was one man among them clothed in linen, with a secretary’s inkhorn at his waist, and they came in and stood beside the copper altar.
Then the glory of the God of Israel rose from where it had rested above the cherubs and moved to the threshold of the doorway of the house, and he began calling out to the man who was clothed in linen, at whose waist was the secretary’s inkhorn.
Jehovah said to him: “Go through the city, through Jerusalem, and put a mark on the foreheads of the men who are sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done in the city.”
And to the others he said in my hearing: “Go through the city after him and strike. Do not let your eye feel sorry, and do not feel any compassion.
Old man, young man, virgin, little child, and women you should kill off completely. But do not go near to any man on whom there is the mark. You should start from my sanctuary.” So they started with the elders who were in front of the house.
Then he said to them: “Defile the house and fill the courtyards with the slain. Go!” So they went out and struck down people in the city.
While they were striking them down, I alone was left, and I fell facedown and cried out: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Are you going to destroy all the remaining ones of Israel while you pour out your rage on Jerusalem?”
So he said to me: “The error of the house of Israel and Judah is very, very great. The land is filled with bloodshed, and the city is full of corruption. For they say, ‘Jehovah has left the land, and Jehovah is not seeing.’
But as for me, my eye will not feel sorry; nor will I show compassion. The consequences of their way I will bring down on their own head.”
Then I saw the man clothed in linen with the inkhorn at his waist bringing back word, saying: “I have done just as you have commanded me.”
As I was watching, I saw above the expanse that was over the heads of the cherubs something like a sapphire stone appearing above them, and its appearance resembled a throne.
Then he said to the man clothed in linen: “Enter between the wheelwork, under the cherubs, and fill both your hands with burning coals from between the cherubs and toss them over the city.” So he entered as I watched.
The cherubs were standing to the right of the house when the man entered, and the cloud filled the inner courtyard.
And the glory of Jehovah rose up from the cherubs to the threshold of the doorway of the house, and the house gradually became filled with the cloud, and the courtyard was full of the brightness of the glory of Jehovah.
And the sound of the wings of the cherubs could be heard in the outer courtyard, like the sound of God Almighty when he speaks.
Then he commanded the man clothed in linen: “Take fire from between the wheelwork, from between the cherubs,” and he entered and stood beside the wheel.
Then one of the cherubs stretched his hand out toward the fire that was between the cherubs. He took some and put it into both hands of the one clothed in linen, who now took it and went out.
The cherubs had what looked like the form of human hands under their wings.
As I was watching, I saw four wheels beside the cherubs, one wheel beside each cherub, and the wheels appeared to glow like chrysʹo·lite stone.
As for their appearance, the four of them were alike, looking as though a wheel were within a wheel.
When they moved, they could go in any of the four directions without turning, because they would go to the place where the head would face without turning.
Their entire bodies, their backs, their hands, their wings, and the wheels, the wheels of all four of them, were full of eyes all around.
As regards the wheels, I heard a voice that called to them, “Wheelwork!”
Each one had four faces. The first face was the face of the cherub, the second face was the face of a man, the third was the face of a lion, and the fourth was the face of an eagle.
And the cherubs would rise—they were the same living creatures that I had seen at the river Cheʹbar—
and when the cherubs moved, the wheels would move alongside them; and when the cherubs lifted up their wings to be high above the earth, the wheels would not turn or move from their side.
When these stood still, they would stand still; and when these rose, they would rise with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was in them.
Then the glory of Jehovah departed from over the threshold of the doorway of the house and stood still over the cherubs.
The cherubs now lifted up their wings and rose from the earth as I watched. The wheels were also alongside them when they departed. They stopped at the entrance of the eastern gate of the house of Jehovah, and the glory of the God of Israel was above them.
These were the living creatures that I had seen under the God of Israel at the river Cheʹbar, so I came to know that they were cherubs.
All four had four faces, four wings, and what appeared to be human hands under their wings.
And the appearances of their faces were like the faces I had seen by the river Cheʹbar. They would each go straight forward.
And a spirit lifted me up and brought me to the eastern gate of the house of Jehovah, the gate that faces east. There at the entrance of the gate I saw  men, and among them were Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Azʹzur and Pel·a·tiʹah the son of Be·naiʹah, princes of the people.
Then He said to me: “Son of man, these are the men who are scheming evil and giving wicked advice in this city.
They are saying, ‘Is it not the time for building houses? The city is the cooking pot, and we are the flesh.’
“So prophesy against them. Prophesy, son of man.”
Then the spirit of Jehovah came upon me, and he said to me: “Say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “What you have said is correct, O house of Israel, and I know what you are thinking.
You have caused many to die in this city, and you have filled her streets with the dead.”’”
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The dead bodies that you have strewn about the city are the flesh, and the city is the cooking pot. But you yourselves will be taken out of it.’”
“‘A sword you have feared, and a sword I will bring against you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘I will bring you out of her and give you into the hand of foreigners and execute judgment on you.
You will fall by the sword. I will judge you at the border of Israel, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
The city will not be a cooking pot for you, and you will not be the flesh within it; I will judge you at the border of Israel,
and you will have to know that I am Jehovah. For you did not walk in my regulations and carry out my judgments, but you have acted in harmony with the judgments of the nations around you.’”
As soon as I prophesied, Pel·a·tiʹah the son of Be·naiʹah died, and I fell facedown and cried with a loud voice: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Are you going to exterminate the remaining ones of Israel?”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, your brothers, those of your brothers with the right of repurchase, along with the entire house of Israel, have been told by the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ‘Keep far away from Jehovah. The land is ours; it has been given to us as a possession.’
Therefore say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Although I have removed them far away among the nations and I have scattered them among the lands, for a little while I will become a sanctuary for them in the lands to which they have gone.”’
“Therefore say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will also collect you from the peoples and gather you from the lands to which you have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.
And they will return there and remove from it all its disgusting things and detestable practices.
And I will give them a unified heart, and I will put a new spirit in them; and I will remove the heart of stone from their bodies and give them a heart of flesh,
in order that they may walk in my statutes and observe my judgments and obey them. Then they will be my people, and I will be their God.”’
“‘“But as for those whose hearts are set to continue in their disgusting things and their detestable practices, I will bring the consequences of their way upon their head,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”
The cherubs now lifted up their wings, and the wheels were close to them, and the glory of the God of Israel was above them.
Then the glory of Jehovah ascended from the city and stopped over the mountain to the east of the city.
A spirit then lifted me up—through a vision by the spirit of God—and brought me to the exiled people in Chal·deʹa. Then the vision that I had seen left me.
And I began to tell the exiled people all the things that Jehovah had shown me.
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, you are living in a rebellious house. They have eyes to see, but they do not see, and ears to hear, but they do not hear, for they are a rebellious house.
As for you, son of man, prepare for yourself luggage for going into exile. Then, during the day while they are watching, you must go into exile. Go into exile from your home to another place while they are watching. Perhaps they will take notice, even though they are a rebellious house.
Bring out your luggage packed for going into exile during the day while they are watching, and then in the evening while they are watching, you should leave like someone being taken into exile.
“While they are watching, bore a hole in the wall, and carry your belongings out through it.
While they are watching, put your belongings on your shoulder and carry them out in the darkness. Cover your face so that you cannot see the ground, for I am making you a sign to the house of Israel.”
I did just as I was commanded. During the day I brought out my luggage as luggage for going into exile, and in the evening I bored a hole through the wall by hand. And when it was dark, I took out my belongings, carrying them on my shoulder right before their eyes.
In the morning the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, did not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, ask you, ‘What are you doing?’
Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “This pronouncement concerns the chieftain in Jerusalem and all the house of Israel within the city.”’
“Say, ‘I am a sign for you. Just as I have done, that is what will be done to them. They will go into exile, into captivity.
The chieftain who is among them will carry his belongings on his shoulder and leave in the darkness. He will bore a hole in the wall and carry his belongings out through it. He will cover his face so that he cannot see the ground.’
I will cast my net over him, and he will be caught in my hunting net. Then I will bring him to Babylon, to the land of the Chal·deʹans, but he will not see it; and there he will die.
And all those around him, his helpers and his troops, I will scatter in every direction; and I will draw out a sword to chase after them.
And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I disperse them among the nations and I scatter them among the lands.
But I will spare a few of them from the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, so that they may tell about all their detestable practices among the nations where they will go; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, you should eat your bread with trembling and drink your water with agitation and anxiety.
Say to the people of the land, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel: “They will eat their bread with anxiety and drink their water with horror, for their land will become completely desolate because of the violence of all those dwelling in it.
The inhabited cities will be devastated, and the land will become a wasteland; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, what is this proverb that you have in Israel that says, ‘The days go by, and every vision comes to nothing’?
Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will cause this saying to cease, and they will no more use it as a proverb in Israel.”’ But tell them, ‘The days are near, and every vision will take place.’
For there will no longer be any false vision or flattering divination within the house of Israel.
‘“For I, Jehovah, will speak. Whatever word I speak will be done without any more delay. In your days, O rebellious house, I will say the word and carry it out,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, this is what the people of Israel are saying, ‘The vision that he sees is for a long time from now, and he is prophesying about the distant future.’
Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “‘None of my words will be delayed; whatever I say will be done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel, and say to those who fabricate their own prophecies, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the stupid prophets, who follow their own spirit, when they have seen nothing!
O Israel, your prophets have become like foxes among the ruins.
You will not go to the broken places in the stone walls to rebuild them for the house of Israel, so that Israel may keep standing in the battle in the day of Jehovah.”
“They have seen false visions and foretold a lie, those who are saying, ‘The word of Jehovah is,’ when Jehovah himself has not sent them, and they have waited for their word to come true.
Is it not a false vision that you have seen and a lie that you have foretold when you say, ‘The word of Jehovah is,’ when I have not said anything?”’
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “‘Because you have spoken what is false and your visions are a lie, I am against you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
My hand is against the prophets whose visions are false and who foretell a lie. They will not be among the people with whom I confide; nor will they be written in the registry of the house of Israel; nor will they return to the land of Israel; and you will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
All of this is because they have led my people astray by saying, “There is peace!” when there is no peace. When a flimsy partition wall is built, they are plastering it with whitewash.’
“Tell those plastering with whitewash that it will fall. A torrential downpour will come, hailstones will fall, and powerful windstorms will break it down.
And when the wall falls you will be asked, ‘Where is your coating of plaster?’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will cause powerful windstorms to burst forth in my wrath, and a torrential downpour in my anger, and hailstones in destructive fury.
I will tear down the wall that you plastered with whitewash and bring it down to the earth, and its foundation will be exposed. When the city falls, you will perish within her; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“‘When I fully unleash my wrath upon the wall and upon those who plastered it with whitewash, I will say to you: “The wall is no more, and those plastering it are no more.
The prophets of Israel are gone, those who prophesy to Jerusalem and who see visions of peace for her, when there is no peace,”’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“As for you, son of man, set your face against the daughters of your people who fabricate their own prophecies, and prophesy against them.
Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the women who sew together bands for all arms and make veils for heads of every size in order to hunt down people’s lives! Are you hunting for the lives of my people and trying to preserve your own lives?
Will you profane me among my people for handfuls of barley and for scraps of bread, putting to death those who should not die and keeping alive those who should not live, doing so by your lies to my people, who listen to your lies?”’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against your bands, O women, which you use to hunt down people as though they were birds, and I will rip them from your arms and release those whom you are hunting down like birds.
I will rip away your veils and rescue my people out of your hand, and they will no longer be something for you to catch in the hunt; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
For you have disheartened the righteous one with your falsehood when I was not causing him distress, and you have strengthened the hands of the wicked one, so that he does not turn back from his bad way and stay alive.
Therefore, you women will no longer see false visions and practice divination; and I will rescue my people from your hand, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
And some of the elders of Israel came and sat down before me.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, these men are determined to follow their disgusting idols, and they have set up a stumbling block that causes people to sin. Should I let them inquire of me?
Now speak with them and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “If an Israelite is determined to follow his disgusting idols and sets up a stumbling block causing people to sin and he then comes to inquire of a prophet, I, Jehovah, will answer him appropriately according to his many disgusting idols.
For I will cause terror in the hearts of the house of Israel because they have all withdrawn from me and have gone after their disgusting idols.”’
“So tell the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Come back and turn away from your disgusting idols and turn your faces away from all your detestable practices.
For if any Israelite or foreign resident living in Israel separates himself from me and is determined to follow his disgusting idols and sets up a stumbling block that causes people to sin and then comes to inquire of my prophet, I, Jehovah, I will personally answer him.
I will set my face against that man and make him a warning sign and a proverbial saying, and I will cut him off from my people; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’
“‘But if the prophet is fooled and gives a response, it is I, Jehovah, who have fooled that prophet. I will then stretch out my hand against him and annihilate him from my people Israel.
They will have to bear their guilt; the guilt of the inquirer will be the same as the guilt of the prophet,
so that the house of Israel may stop wandering away from me and stop defiling themselves by all their transgressions. And they will be my people, and I will be their God,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, if a land sins against me by acting unfaithfully, I will stretch out my hand against it and destroy its food supply, and I will send famine upon it and cut off man and animal from it.”
“‘Even if these three men—Noah, Daniel, and Job—were within it, they would be able to save only themselves because of their righteousness,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“‘Or suppose I make vicious wild animals pass through the land and they depopulate it and make it a wasteland without anyone passing through because of the wild animals.
As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘even if these three men were in it, they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves, and the land would become desolate.’”
“‘Or suppose I bring a sword against that land and say: “Let a sword pass through the land,” and cut off from it both man and animal,
even if these three men were in it, as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves.’”
“‘Or suppose I send a pestilence into that land and pour out my rage on it with bloodshed to cut off from it man and animal,
even if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves because of their righteousness.’”
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘So it will be when I send my four punishments—sword, famine, vicious wild animal, and pestilence—against Jerusalem to cut off man and animal from it.
However, some left in it will escape and be brought out, both sons and daughters. They are coming to you, and when you see their ways and their deeds, you will certainly be comforted over the calamity that I brought on Jerusalem, over everything that I did to it.’”
“‘They will comfort you when you see their ways and their deeds, and you will know that it was not without cause that I did what I had to do to it,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, how does the wood of the vine compare with that of any other tree or branch from the trees of the forest?
Can a pole from it be used to do work? Or do people make a peg from it to hang utensils on?
Look! It is thrown into the fire for fuel, and the fire consumes both ends and scorches the middle. Is it now fit for any work?
Even when it was whole, it could not be used for anything. How much less useful it will be when the fire has consumed and scorched it!”
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Just like the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest, which I have given as fuel for the fire, so I will deal with the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
I have set my face against them. They have escaped from the fire, but fire will consume them. And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I set my face against them.’”
“‘And I will make the land desolate because they have acted unfaithfully,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, make known to Jerusalem her detestable practices.
You must say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to Jerusalem: “Your origin and your birth were in the land of the Caʹnaan·ite. Your father was an Amʹor·ite, and your mother was a Hitʹtite.
As for your birth, on the day you were born, your umbilical cord was not cut, you were not washed in water to make you clean, you were not rubbed with salt, and you were not wrapped in cloths.
No one pitied you enough to do any of these things. No one had compassion for you. Instead, you were thrown into the open field because you were hated on the day you were born.
“‘“When I was passing by, I saw you kicking about in your own blood, and as you lay there in your blood, I said: ‘Keep living!’ Yes, I said to you lying there in your blood: ‘Keep living!’
I made you a very great multitude, like plants sprouting in the field, and you grew up and developed and wore the finest ornaments. Your breasts became firm, and your hair grew; but you were still naked and exposed.”’
“‘When I was passing by and saw you, I noticed that you were old enough for expressions of love. So I spread my garment over you and covered your nakedness and made an oath and entered into a covenant with you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and you became mine.
Furthermore, I washed you with water and rinsed away your blood and put oil on you.
I then clothed you with an embroidered garment and gave you fine leather sandals and wrapped you in fine linen, and I clothed you with costly garments.
I adorned you with ornaments and put bracelets on your hands and a necklace around your neck.
I also put a ring in your nose and earrings on your ears and a beautiful crown on your head.
You kept adorning yourself with gold and silver, and your clothing was fine linen, costly material, and an embroidered garment. Fine flour, honey, and oil were what you ate, and you grew to be extremely beautiful, and you became fit to be a queen.’”
“‘Your fame began to spread among the nations because of your beauty, for it was perfect because my own splendor I placed upon you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“‘But you began to trust in your beauty, and you became a prostitute because of your fame. You lavished your acts of prostitution on everyone passing by, and your beauty became his.
You took some of your garments and made colorful high places where you prostituted yourself—such things should not take place, nor should they ever happen.
You also took your beautiful jewelry made from the gold and silver that I had given to you and you made for yourself male images and prostituted yourself with them.
And you took your embroidered garments and covered them, and you offered them my oil and my incense.
And the bread that I had given to you—made from fine flour, oil, and honey that I gave you to eat—you also offered to them as a pleasing aroma. That is exactly what happened,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“‘You took your sons and your daughters whom you had borne to me, and you sacrificed these to idols to be devoured—have your acts of prostitution not gone far enough?
You slaughtered my sons, and you offered them as sacrifices by making them pass through the fire.
While engaging in all your detestable practices and acts of prostitution, you did not remember the days of your youth when you were naked and exposed, kicking about in your own blood.
After all your evil, woe, woe to you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘You built yourself a mound and made a high place for yourself in every public square.
You built your high places at the most prominent place of every street, and you turned your beauty into something detestable by offering yourself to everyone passing by, and you multiplied your acts of prostitution.
You prostituted yourself to the sons of Egypt, your lustful neighbors, and you offended me with your countless acts of prostitution.
Now I will bring my hand against you and diminish your food allowance and give you over to the will of the women who hate you, the daughters of the Phi·lisʹtines, who were appalled because of your obscene conduct.
“‘Because you could not be satisfied, you then prostituted yourself to the sons of As·syrʹi·a, but after prostituting yourself to them, you still did not find satisfaction.
So you increased your prostitution toward the land of traders and toward the Chal·deʹans, but even then you did not find satisfaction.
How sick your heart was,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘when you did all these things, behaving like a brazen prostitute!
But when you built your mound at the most prominent place of every street and made your high place in every public square, you were not like a prostitute, because you refused any payment.
You are an adulterous wife who takes strangers instead of her own husband!
People give all prostitutes a gift, but you are the one who has given gifts to all those lusting after you, and you bribe them to come to you from all around to commit prostitution.
You are the opposite of other women who engage in prostitution. No one commits prostitution your way! You pay others, and they do not pay you. Your way is the opposite.’
“Therefore, O prostitute, hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because your lust has been poured out and your nakedness has been exposed during your prostitution with your lovers and all your detestable, disgusting idols to which you even sacrificed the blood of your sons,
therefore I am collecting together all the lovers you have given pleasure to, all those you loved together with all those you hated. I will collect them together against you from all around and expose your nakedness to them, and they will see you completely naked.
“‘And I will punish you with the judgments that adulteresses and women shedding blood deserve, and your blood will be shed in rage and jealousy.
I will give you into their hand, and they will tear down your mounds, and your high places will be pulled down; and they will strip you of your garments and take your beautiful jewelry and leave you naked and exposed.
They will bring against you a crowd, and they will stone you and will slaughter you with their swords.
They will burn your houses with fire and execute judgment on you before the eyes of many women; and I will bring an end to your prostitution, and you will stop giving payment.
I will satisfy my rage against you, and my indignation will turn away from you; and I will be calm and no longer feel offended.’
“‘Because you did not remember the days of your youth and you have angered me by doing all these things, I will now bring the consequences of your ways on your own head,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and you will no longer carry on your obscene conduct and all your detestable practices.
“‘Look! Everyone who uses proverbs will apply this proverb to you: “Like mother, like daughter!”
You are the daughter of your mother, who despised her husband and her children. And you are the sister of your sisters, who despised their husbands and their children. Your mother was a Hitʹtite, and your father was an Amʹor·ite.’”
“‘Your older sister is Sa·marʹi·a, who is dwelling to the north of you with her daughters, and your younger sister, who is dwelling to the south of you, is Sodʹom with her daughters.
Not only did you walk in their ways and follow their detestable practices, but in a short while you were even more corrupt in all your conduct than they were.
As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘Sodʹom your sister and her daughters have not done what you and your daughters have done.
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, tell a riddle and relate a proverb about the house of Israel.
You must say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “The great eagle, with great wings, long pinions, and full, colorful plumage, came to Lebʹa·non and took the top of the cedar.
He plucked off its topmost shoot and brought it to the land of traders and set it down in a city of traders.
He then took some of the seed of the land and put it in a fertile field. He planted it like a willow by abundant waters.
So it sprouted and became a low, sprawling vine with its foliage facing inward and its roots growing under it. Thus it became a vine and produced shoots and sent out branches.
“‘“And there came another great eagle, with great wings and large pinions. This vine then stretched its roots eagerly toward him, away from the garden beds where it was planted, and it sent out its foliage toward him so that he would irrigate it.
It had already been planted in a good field near abundant waters, in order to produce branches, to bear fruit, and to become a majestic vine.”’
“Say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Will it prosper? Will someone not tear out its roots and make its fruit rot and cause its sprouts to wither? It will become so dry that neither a strong arm nor many people will be needed to pull it up by the roots.
Although it is transplanted, will it prosper? Will it not dry up completely when the east wind blows on it? It will dry up in the garden bed where it sprouted.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Please tell the rebellious house, ‘Do you not realize what these things mean?’ Say, ‘Look! The king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and took its king and its princes and brought them back with him to Babylon.
Furthermore, he took one of the royal offspring and made a covenant with him and put him under an oath. Then he took away the prominent men of the land,
so that the kingdom would be brought low, unable to rise up, so that only by keeping his covenant might it continue to exist.
But the king finally rebelled against him by sending his messengers to Egypt to obtain horses and a large army from them. Will he succeed? Will the one doing these things escape punishment? Can he break the covenant and still escape?’
“‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “he will die in Babylon, in the place where the king who made him king lives, the one whose oath he despised and whose covenant he broke.
And the great army and numerous troops of Pharʹaoh will be of no help in the war, when siege ramparts are raised and siege walls are built to destroy many lives.
He has despised an oath and broken a covenant. Even though he gave his promise, he has done all these things, and he will not escape.”’
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “As surely as I am alive, I will bring upon his head the consequences of despising my oath and breaking my covenant.
I will cast my net over him, and he will be caught in my hunting net. I will bring him to Babylon and enter into judgment with him there because of the unfaithfulness he committed against me.
All the fugitives of his troops will fall by the sword, and those remaining will be scattered in every direction. Then you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.”’
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take a shoot from the top of the lofty cedar and plant it, from the top of its twigs I will pluck a tender shoot, and I myself will plant it on a high and lofty mountain.
On a high mountain of Israel I will plant it; and its branches will grow, and it will produce fruit and become a majestic cedar. And every kind of bird will live beneath it and reside in the shadow of its foliage.
And all the trees of the field will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have brought down the high tree and exalted the low tree; I have dried up the green tree and made the dry tree blossom. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken and have done it.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“What does this proverb that you quote in the land of Israel mean, ‘Fathers have eaten sour grapes, but the teeth of the sons are set on edge’?
“‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘you will not continue to quote this saying in Israel.
Look! All the souls—to me they belong. As the soul of the father so also the soul of the son—to me they belong. The soul who sins is the one who will die.
“‘Suppose that a man is righteous and does what is just and right.
He does not eat idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains; he does not look up to the disgusting idols of the house of Israel; he does not defile his neighbor’s wife or have relations with a woman who is menstruating;
he does not mistreat anyone, but he returns what a debtor has given him in pledge; he does not rob anyone, but he gives his own food to the hungry one and covers the naked one with a garment;
he does not charge interest or engage in usury, but he refrains from acting with injustice; he executes true justice between one man and another;
and he keeps walking in my statutes and observing my judicial decisions in order to act in faithfulness. Such a man is righteous and will surely keep living,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘But suppose that he has become father to a son who is a robber or a murderer or who does any of these other things
(though the father has not done any of these things)—he eats idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains, defiles his neighbor’s wife,
mistreats the needy and the poor, takes things by robbery, does not return a pledge, looks up to the disgusting idols, engages in detestable practices,
engages in usury and charges interest—then the son will not keep living. Because of all these detestable things that he has done, he will surely be put to death. His own blood will be upon him.
“‘But suppose that a father has a son who sees all the sins his father has committed, and though he sees them, he does not do such things.
He does not eat idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains; he does not look up to the disgusting idols of the house of Israel; he does not defile his neighbor’s wife;
he does not mistreat anyone; he does not seize what was pledged; he does not take anything in robbery; he gives his own food to the hungry one and covers the naked one with a garment;
he refrains from oppressing the poor; he does not engage in usury or charge interest; and he carries out my judicial decisions and walks in my statutes. Such a man will not die because of the error of his father. He will surely keep living.
But because his father practiced fraud, robbed his brother, and did what was wrong among his people, he will die for his error.
“‘But you will say: “Why does the son not bear guilt because of his father’s error?” Since the son has done what is just and righteous, has kept all my statutes and has observed them, he will surely keep living.
The soul who sins is the one who will die. A son will bear no guilt because of the error of his father, and a father will bear no guilt because of the error of his son. The righteousness of the righteous one will be accounted to him alone, and the wickedness of the wicked one will be accounted to him alone.
“‘Now if someone wicked turns away from all the sins he has committed and keeps my statutes and does what is just and righteous, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
None of the transgressions that he has committed will be held against him. He will keep living for doing what is righteous.’
“‘Do I take any pleasure at all in the death of a wicked person?’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Do I not prefer that he turn away from his ways and keep living?’
“‘But when someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, doing all the detestable things the wicked do, will he live? None of the righteous acts that he did will be remembered. For his unfaithfulness and the sin he has committed, he will die.
“‘But you will say: “The way of Jehovah is unjust.” Please listen, O house of Israel! Is it my way that is unjust? Is it not your ways that are unjust?
“‘When someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong and dies because of it, he will die for his own wrongdoing.
“‘And when someone wicked turns away from the wickedness that he has committed and begins to do what is just and righteous, he will preserve his own life.
When he realizes and turns away from all the transgressions that he has committed, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
“‘But the house of Israel will say: “The way of Jehovah is unjust.” Is it really my ways that are unjust, O house of Israel? Is it not your ways that are unjust?’
“‘Therefore, I will judge each one of you according to his ways, O house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Turn away, yes, turn completely away from all your transgressions, so that they will not be a stumbling block bringing guilt upon you.
Rid yourselves of all the transgressions you have committed and acquire a new heart and a new spirit, for why should you die, O house of Israel?’
“‘I do not take any pleasure in the death of anyone,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘So turn back and live.’”
“You must sing a dirge concerning the chieftains of Israel
and say,
She raised one of her cubs, and he became a strong young lion.
Nations heard about him and caught him in their pit,
She waited and eventually saw that there was no hope for his return.
He also walked about among the lions and became a strong young lion.
He prowled among their fortified towers and devastated their cities,
Nations from the surrounding districts came against him to cast their net over him,
With hooks they put him in a cage and brought him to the king of Babylon.
Your mother was like a vine in your blood, planted by waters.
It developed strong branches, fit for the scepters of rulers.
But in fury she was uprooted and thrown to the earth,
Now she is planted in the wilderness,
The fire spread from her branches and consumed her shoots and her fruit,
Now in the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, some of the elders of Israel came and sat down before me to inquire of Jehovah.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, speak with the elders of Israel, and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Are you coming to inquire of me? ‘As surely as I am alive, I will not respond to your inquiry,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
“Are you ready to judge them? Are you ready to judge them, son of man? Make them know the detestable things that their forefathers did.
Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “In the day I chose Israel, I also swore to the offspring of the house of Jacob, and I made myself known to them in the land of Egypt. Yes, I swore to them and said, ‘I am Jehovah your God.’
In that day I swore that I would bring them out of the land of Egypt to a land that I had searched out for them, one flowing with milk and honey. It was the most beautiful of all the lands.
I then said to them, ‘Each of you must throw away the detestable things that are before your eyes; do not defile yourselves with the disgusting idols of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.’
“‘“But they rebelled against me and were not willing to listen to me. They did not throw away the detestable things that were before them, and they would not abandon the disgusting idols of Egypt. So I promised to pour out my rage on them and to unleash my anger fully against them in the land of Egypt.
But I acted for the sake of my name so that it would not be profaned before the nations among whom they were living. For I made myself known to them before these nations when I brought them out of the land of Egypt.
So I brought them out of the land of Egypt and led them into the wilderness.
“‘“I then gave them my statutes and made my judicial decisions known to them, so that the man who follows them may have life by them.
I also gave my sabbaths to them as a sign between me and them, so that they would know that I, Jehovah, am the one sanctifying them.
“‘“But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness. They did not walk in my statutes, and they rejected my judicial decisions, which if a man follows them, he will have life by them. They utterly profaned my sabbaths. So I promised to pour out my fury on them in the wilderness to exterminate them.
I acted for the sake of my own name so that it would not be profaned before the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
I also swore to them in the wilderness that I would not bring them into the land that I had given them—a land flowing with milk and honey, the most beautiful of all the lands—
because they rejected my judicial decisions, they did not walk in my statutes, and they profaned my sabbaths, for their heart was following after their disgusting idols.
“‘“But I felt sorry for them, and I did not destroy them; I did not exterminate them in the wilderness.
I said to their sons in the wilderness, ‘Do not walk in the regulations of your forefathers or keep their judgments or defile yourselves with their disgusting idols.
I am Jehovah your God. Walk in my statutes, and keep my judicial decisions, and carry them out.
And sanctify my sabbaths, and they will serve as a sign between me and you for you to know that I am Jehovah your God.’
“‘“But the sons began to rebel against me. They did not walk in my statutes, and they did not observe and carry out my judicial decisions, which if a man follows them, he will have life by them. My sabbaths they profaned. So I promised to pour out my rage on them and to unleash my anger against them fully in the wilderness.
But I refrained and acted for the sake of my own name, so that it should not be profaned before the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
Also, I swore to them in the wilderness that I would scatter them among the nations and disperse them among the lands,
because they did not carry out my judicial decisions and they rejected my statutes, they profaned my sabbaths, and they followed after the disgusting idols of their forefathers.
I also allowed them to follow regulations that were not good and judicial decisions by which they could not have life.
I let them become defiled by their own sacrifices—when they made every firstborn child pass through the fire—in order to make them desolate, so that they would know that I am Jehovah.”’
“So speak to the house of Israel, O son of man, and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “In this way also, your forefathers blasphemed me by acting unfaithfully against me.
I brought them into the land that I swore to give them. When they saw all the high hills and leafy trees, they began offering their sacrifices and their offensive offerings. They presented the pleasing aromas of their sacrifices and poured out their drink offerings there.
So I asked them, ‘What is the meaning of this high place to which you go? (It is still called High Place to this day.)’”’
“Now say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Are you defiling yourselves the same way your forefathers did by going after their disgusting idols to commit spiritual prostitution with them?
And are you still defiling yourselves to this day by offering sacrifices to all your disgusting idols, making your sons pass through the fire? Should I at the same time respond to your inquiry, O house of Israel?”’
And what you have in mind when you say, “Let us become like the nations, like the families of the other lands, who worship wood and stone,” it will never happen.’”
“‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will rule as king over you with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with an outpouring of rage.
I will bring you out from the peoples and collect you together out of the lands where you have been scattered with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with an outpouring of rage.
I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples and enter into judgment with you there face-to-face.
“‘Just as I entered into judgment with your forefathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘I will make you pass under the shepherd’s staff and bring you under obligation to the covenant.
But I will remove from you the rebels and those transgressing against me. For I will bring them out of the land of their foreign residence, but they will not enter the land of Israel; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“As for you, O house of Israel, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Each of you go and serve his disgusting idols. But afterward if you do not listen to me, you will no longer be able to profane my holy name by your sacrifices and your disgusting idols.’
“‘For in my holy mountain, on a high mountain of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘is where the whole house of Israel, all of them, will serve me in the land. I will take pleasure in them there, and I will require your contributions and the firstfruits of your offerings, all your holy things.
Because of the pleasing aroma, I will take pleasure in you when I bring you out from the peoples and collect you together from the lands to which you have been scattered; and I will be sanctified among you before the eyes of the nations.’
“‘And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I bring you to the land of Israel, into the land that I swore to give to your forefathers.
And there you will remember your conduct and all your deeds by which you defiled yourselves, and you will loathe yourselves because of all the bad things that you did.
Then you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I deal with you for the sake of my name, not according to your wicked conduct or according to your corrupted dealings, O house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face in the direction of the southern quarter and proclaim to the south, and prophesy to the forest of the field of the south.
Say to the forest of the south, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah. This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am setting a fire ablaze against you, and it will consume every green tree and every dry tree in you. The burning flame will not be extinguished, and every face will be scorched by it, from south to north.
And all flesh will see that I myself, Jehovah, have set it afire, so that it will not be extinguished.”’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward Jerusalem, and make a proclamation against the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel.
Say to the land of Israel, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, and I will bring my sword out of its sheath and cut off from you both the righteous and the wicked.
Because I will cut off from you the righteous and the wicked, my sword will be drawn from its sheath against all flesh, from south to north.
All people will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have drawn my sword from its sheath. It will not go back again.”’
“And you, son of man, sigh while you tremble, yes, sigh bitterly before them.
And if they say to you, ‘Why are you sighing?’ you will say, ‘Because of a report.’ For it will certainly come, and every heart will melt with fear and every hand will hang limp and every spirit will become dejected and every knee will drip with water. ‘Look! It will certainly come—it will take place,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Say, ‘A sword! A sword is sharpened, and it is polished.
It is sharpened to inflict a great slaughter; it is polished to flash like lightning.’”’”
“‘It is given to be polished and to be wielded with the hand. This sword is sharpened and polished, to be put into the hand of an executioner.
“‘Cry out and wail, son of man, for it has come against my people; it is against all the chieftains of Israel. These will be victims of the sword along with my people. So strike your thigh in grief.
For an examination has been made, and what will happen if the sword rejects the scepter? It will cease to exist,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“And you, son of man, prophesy and clap your hands and repeat ‘A sword!’ three times. It is the sword of the slain victims, the sword of great slaughter, that surrounds them.
Their hearts will melt with fear and many will fall at their city gates; I will inflict a slaughter by the sword. Yes, it flashes like lightning and is polished for a slaughter!
Cut sharply to the right! Swing to the left! Go wherever your blade is directed!
I will also clap my hands and satisfy my rage. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“As for you, son of man, mark out two ways for the sword of the king of Babylon to come. Both of them will originate from the same land, and a signpost should be set up where the road branches off to the two cities.
You should mark out one way for the sword to come against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, and the other way against fortified Jerusalem in Judah.
For the king of Babylon stops to use divination at the fork in the road, where the two roads branch off. He shakes the arrows. He consults his idols; he examines the liver.
The divination in his right hand is pointed toward Jerusalem, to set up battering rams, to give the word for slaughter, to sound the battle cry, to set battering rams against the gates, to throw up a siege rampart, to build a siege wall.
But it will seem like false divination in the eyes of those who had sworn oaths to them. But he remembers their guilt and will capture them.
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘You have caused your own guilt to be remembered by exposing your transgressions and causing your sins to be seen in all your actions. Now that you have been remembered, you will be taken by force.’
“But your day has come, O fatally wounded, wicked chieftain of Israel, the time of your final punishment.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Remove the turban, and take off the crown. This will not remain the same. Raise up the low one, and bring low the high one.
A ruin, a ruin, a ruin I will make it. And it will not belong to anyone until the one who has the legal right comes, and I will give it to him.’
“And you, son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says about the Amʹmon·ites and about their insults.’ Say, ‘A sword! A sword is drawn for a slaughter; it is polished to devour and to flash like lightning.
Despite the false visions and lying divination about you, you will be piled up on the slain, the wicked men whose day has come, the time of their final punishment.
Return it to its sheath. I will judge you in the place that you were created, in the land of your origin.
I will pour out my indignation on you. I will blow upon you with the fire of my fury, and I will hand you over to brutal men, the craftsmen of destruction.
You will become fuel for the fire; your own blood will be shed in the land, and you will be remembered no more, for I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“As for you, son of man, are you prepared to pronounce judgment on the bloodguilty city and to make known to her all her detestable things?
You are to say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “O city that sheds blood within herself, whose time is coming, who makes disgusting idols to defile herself,
your bloodshed has made you guilty, and your disgusting idols have made you unclean. You have hastened the end of your days, and the end of your years has come. That is why I will make you an object of reproach to the nations and an object of mockery to all the lands.
The lands nearby and those far away from you will mock you, you whose name is unclean and who are filled with turmoil.
Look! Each of the chieftains of Israel among you uses his authority to shed blood.
Within you they treat their father and mother with contempt. They defraud the foreign resident, and they mistreat the fatherless child and the widow.”’”
“‘My holy places you despise, and my sabbaths you profane.
Within you are slanderers intent on shedding blood. Within you they eat sacrifices on the mountains and carry on obscene conduct in your midst.
Within you they dishonor their father’s bed, and they violate a woman unclean in her menstruation.
Within you one man acts detestably with his neighbor’s wife, another defiles his own daughter-in-law with obscene conduct, and another violates his sister, the daughter of his own father.
Within you they take a bribe to shed blood. You lend on interest or for a profit, and you extort money from your neighbors. Yes, you have entirely forgotten me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘Look! I clap my hands in disgust at the dishonest gain you have made and over the acts of bloodshed in your midst.
Will your courage endure and your hands remain strong in the days when I take action against you? I myself, Jehovah, have spoken, and I will take action.
I will scatter you among the nations and disperse you among the lands, and I will put an end to your uncleanness.
And you will be dishonored before the nations, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, the house of Israel has become like worthless dross to me. All of them are copper and tin and iron and lead in a furnace. They have become the dross of silver.
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because all of you have become like worthless dross, I am collecting you together inside Jerusalem.
Just as silver and copper and iron and lead and tin are collected inside a furnace in order to blow fire upon them and melt them, so I will collect you together in my anger and in my rage, and I will blow upon you and make you melt.
I will bring you together and blow upon you with the fire of my fury, and you will be melted inside of her.
Just as silver is melted in a furnace, so you will be melted inside her; and you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have poured out my rage on you.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, say to her, ‘You are a land that will not be cleansed or rained on in the day of indignation.
Her prophets have conspired within her, like a roaring lion tearing prey. They are devouring people. They are seizing treasure and precious things. They have made many widows within her.
Her priests have violated my law, and they keep profaning my holy places. They make no distinction between what is holy and what is common, and they fail to make known what is unclean and what is clean, and they refuse to observe my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
Her princes in her midst are like wolves tearing prey; they shed blood and kill people to make dishonest gain.
But her prophets have plastered over their deeds with whitewash. They see false visions and give lying divination, and they say: “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says,” when Jehovah himself has not spoken.
The people of the land have defrauded and committed robbery, they have mistreated the needy and the poor, and they have defrauded the foreign resident and denied him justice.’
“‘I was looking for a man from among them who would repair the stone wall or stand before me in the breach in behalf of the land, so that it would not be destroyed, but I found no one.
So I will pour out my indignation on them and exterminate them with the fire of my fury. I will bring the consequences of their way on their own head,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, there were two women who were the daughters of the same mother.
They became prostitutes in Egypt; from their youth they engaged in prostitution. Their breasts were squeezed there, and their virgin bosoms were fondled.
Their names were O·hoʹlah, the older one, and her sister O·hoʹli·bah. They became mine and gave birth to sons and daughters. As for their names, O·hoʹlah is Sa·marʹi·a, and O·hoʹli·bah is Jerusalem.
“O·hoʹlah began to prostitute herself while she belonged to me. She lusted after her passionate lovers, her neighbors the As·syrʹi·ans.
They were governors clothed in blue and deputy rulers—all desirable young men mounted on their horses.
She continued to prostitute herself with all the choicest sons of As·syrʹi·a, and she defiled herself with the disgusting idols of those she lusted after.
She did not abandon the prostitution she practiced in Egypt, for in her youth they had lain down with her, and they fondled her virgin bosom and poured out their lust on her.
So I gave her into the hand of her passionate lovers, the sons of As·syrʹi·a, after whom she had lusted.
They exposed her nakedness and seized her sons and daughters, and they killed her with a sword. She became notorious among women, and they executed judgment against her.
“When her sister O·hoʹli·bah saw it, her lust became even more depraved, and her prostitution was worse than that of her sister.
She lusted after her neighbors the sons of As·syrʹi·a, the governors and deputy rulers who were clothed in splendor and mounted on horses—all desirable young men.
When she defiled herself, I saw that both of them had followed the same course.
But she kept adding to her acts of prostitution. She saw men carved on the wall, images of Chal·deʹans carved in vermilion,
wearing belts around their waist, with flowing turbans on their heads, having the appearance of warriors, all of them depicting Babylonians, born in the land of the Chal·deʹans.
She began to lust after them as soon as she saw them, and she sent messengers to them in Chal·deʹa.
So the sons of Babylon kept coming to her bed of lovemaking, and they defiled her with their lust. After she was defiled by them, she turned away from them in disgust.
“When she went on brazenly engaging in prostitution and exposing her nakedness, I turned away from her in disgust, just as I had turned away from her sister in disgust.
And she kept increasing her acts of prostitution, calling to mind the days of her youth when she prostituted herself in the land of Egypt.
She lusted after them like the concubines of men whose male members are like those of a donkey and whose genitals are like those of a horse.
You yearned for the obscene conduct of your youth in Egypt when they fondled your bosom, the breasts of your youth.
“Therefore, O·hoʹli·bah, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am stirring up your lovers whom you turned away from in disgust, and I will bring them against you from every direction,
the sons of Babylon and all the Chal·deʹans, the men of Peʹkod and Shoʹa and Koʹa, along with all the sons of As·syrʹi·a. All of them are desirable young men, governors and deputy rulers, warriors and handpicked, all mounted on horses.
They will attack you with rumbling war chariots and wheels and with a great assembly of troops, with large shield and buckler and helmet. They will take up positions all around you, and I will authorize them to pass judgment, and they will judge you as they see fit.
I will express my indignation against you, and they will deal with you in their rage. They will cut off your nose and your ears, and those of you who remain will fall by the sword. They will take away your sons and your daughters, and those of you who remain will be consumed by fire.
They will strip off your garments and seize your beautiful jewelry.
I will put an end to your obscene conduct and your prostitution, which started in the land of Egypt. You will stop looking at them, and you will remember Egypt no more.’
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am about to hand you over to those you hate, those you turned away from in disgust.
They will deal with you in hatred and take away all you have toiled for and leave you naked and exposed. The shameful nakedness of your immorality and your obscene conduct and your prostitution will be exposed.
These things will be done to you because you chased after the nations like a prostitute, because you defiled yourself with their disgusting idols.
You have followed the same course as your sister, and I will put her cup into your hand.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
You will be overcome by drunkenness and grief,
You will have to drink it and drain it dry and gnaw on its earthenware fragments
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you have forgotten me and have completely disregarded me, you will bear the consequences of your obscene conduct and your acts of prostitution.’”
Jehovah then said to me: “Son of man, will you pronounce judgment on O·hoʹlah and O·hoʹli·bah and confront them with their disgusting practices?
They have committed adultery, and there is blood on their hands. Not only have they committed adultery with their disgusting idols, but they have also made their sons whom they bore to me pass through the fire as food for their idols.
Moreover, this is what they have done to me: They defiled my sanctuary on that day, and they profaned my sabbaths.
After they slaughtered their sons as sacrifices to their disgusting idols, they came into my sanctuary to profane it on that very day. That is what they did inside my own house.
They even sent a messenger for men to come from far away. When they were coming, you washed yourself and painted your eyes and adorned yourself with ornaments.
And you sat down on a magnificent couch with a table set in front of it, on which you put my incense and my oil.
The sound of a carefree crowd of men was heard there, among whom were drunkards brought in from the wilderness. They put bracelets on the hands of the women and beautiful crowns on their heads.
“Then I said regarding her who was worn out with adultery: ‘Now she will keep committing her prostitution.’
So they kept going in to her, just as one goes to a prostitute. That is how they went in to O·hoʹlah and to O·hoʹli·bah, the women of obscene conduct.
But righteous men will render to her the appropriate judgment for adultery and bloodshed; for adulteresses is what they are, and they have blood on their hands.
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘An army will be brought against them to make them an object of horror and something to plunder.
The army will hurl stones at them and cut them down with their swords. They will kill their sons and daughters and burn their houses with fire.
I will put an end to the obscene conduct in the land, and all the women will learn a lesson and not copy your obscene conduct.
The word of Jehovah again came to me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, saying:
“Son of man, record this date, this very day. The king of Babylon has begun his attack against Jerusalem on this very day.
And relate a proverb concerning the rebellious house, and say concerning them:
Put pieces of meat into it, every good piece,
Take the choicest sheep of the flock, and stack the logs all around under the pot.
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
For its blood is within it; she poured it out on the bare rock.
To stir up rage for executing vengeance,
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
Heap on the logs and kindle the fire,
Set the empty pot on the coals to make it hot
It is frustrating and exhausting,
“‘Your uncleanness was due to your obscene conduct. I tried to cleanse you, but you would not become clean from your uncleanness. You will not become clean until my rage against you subsides.
I myself, Jehovah, have spoken. It will come to pass. I will act without holding back, without sorrow, without regret. They will judge you according to your ways and your dealings,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, in a single blow I am about to take away your dear one from you. You should not mourn; nor should you weep or shed tears.
Groan in silence, and do not observe mourning rites for the dead. Bind on your turban, and put on your sandals. You should not cover over the mustache, and do not eat the bread brought to you by others.”
And I spoke to the people in the morning, and my wife died in the evening. So I did in the morning just as I had been commanded.
The people were saying to me: “Will you not tell us what these things you are doing have to do with us?”
I replied to them: “The word of Jehovah has come to me, saying,
‘Tell the house of Israel: “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘I am about to profane my sanctuary, the source of your great pride, the thing dear to you and the desire of your heart. Your own sons and daughters whom you left behind will fall by the sword.
Then you will have to do just as I have done. You will not cover over your mustache, and you will not eat the bread brought to you by others.
Your turbans will be on your heads and your sandals on your feet. You will not mourn or weep. Instead, you will rot away in your errors, and you will groan to one another.
Ezekiel has become a sign for you. Just as he has done, you will do. When it happens, you will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”’”
“And as for you, son of man, on the day that I take away from them their fortress—the beautiful object of their joy, the thing dear to them, their heart’s desire—along with their sons and daughters,
it will be reported to you by one who has escaped.
In that day you will open your mouth and speak to the one who escaped, and you will no longer be mute. You will become a sign to them, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward the Amʹmon·ites, and prophesy against them.
You must say concerning the Amʹmon·ites, ‘Hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because you said ‘Aha!’ against my sanctuary when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was laid desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into exile,
therefore I am giving you to the people of the East as a possession. They will set up their encampments within you and pitch their tents among you. They will eat your fruitage, and they will drink your milk.
I will make Rabʹbah a pasture ground for camels, and the land of the Amʹmon·ites a resting-place for the flock; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you clapped your hands and stamped your feet and you rejoiced over the land of Israel with such utter scorn,
therefore I will stretch out my hand against you to give you to the nations as something to plunder. I will cut you off from the peoples and destroy you from the lands. I will annihilate you, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because Moʹab and Seʹir have said, “Look! The house of Judah is like all the other nations,”
I am exposing Moʹab’s flank at his frontier cities, the beauty of his land, Beth-jeshʹi·moth, Baʹal-meʹon, and clear to Kir·i·a·thaʹim.
I will give it along with the Amʹmon·ites as a possession to the people of the East, so that the Amʹmon·ites will not be remembered among the nations.
And I will execute judgment in Moʹab, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Eʹdom has acted vengefully against the house of Judah and has incurred great guilt in taking revenge on them;
therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will also stretch out my hand against Eʹdom and cut off from it both man and livestock, and I will make it desolate. From Teʹman clear to Deʹdan, they will fall by the sword.
‘I will take vengeance on Eʹdom by the hand of my people Israel. They will bring my anger and my wrath on Eʹdom, so that they experience my own vengeance,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because of their unrelenting hostility, the Phi·lisʹtines have maliciously sought to bring vengeance and destruction.
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am stretching out my hand against the Phi·lisʹtines, and I will cut off the Cherʹe·thites and will destroy the remaining inhabitants of the seacoast.
I will execute on them great acts of vengeance with furious punishments, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I bring my vengeance on them.”’”
In the th year, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, because Tyre has said against Jerusalem, ‘Aha! The gateway of the peoples has been broken! Everything will come my way, and I will become rich now that she is devastated’;
therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against you, O Tyre, and I will bring up many nations against you, just as the sea brings up its waves.
They will destroy the walls of Tyre and tear down her towers, and I will scrape away soil and make her a shining, bare rock.
She will become a drying yard for dragnets in the midst of the sea.’
And her settlements in the countryside will be slaughtered by the sword, and people will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am bringing King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon against Tyre from the north; he is a king of kings, with horses, war chariots, cavalrymen, and an army of many soldiers.
He will destroy your settlements in the countryside with the sword, and he will build a siege wall and throw up a siege rampart against you and raise up a great shield against you.
He will pound your walls with his battering ram, and with his axes he will pull down your towers.
His horses will be so many that they will cover you with dust, and the sound of the cavalry, the wheels, and the chariots will cause your walls to shake when he enters your gates, like men storming a city with broken walls.
The hooves of his horses will trample down all your streets; he will kill your people with the sword, and your mighty pillars will crash to the ground.
They will loot your resources, plunder your merchandise, tear down your walls, and pull down your fine houses; then they will throw your stones and your woodwork and your soil into the water.’
“‘I will put an end to the noise of your songs, and the sound of your harps will be heard no more.
And I will make you a shining, bare rock, and you will become a drying yard for dragnets. You will never be rebuilt, for I myself, Jehovah, have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to Tyre: ‘At the sound of your downfall, when the dying ones are groaning, when a slaughter takes place in your midst, will the islands not shudder?
All the princes of the sea will come down from their thrones and remove their robes and strip off their embroidered garments, and they will be seized with trembling. They will sit on the ground and tremble constantly and stare at you in amazement.
And they will sing a dirge over you and say to you:
The islands will tremble on the day of your downfall,
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘When I devastate you like the cities that are not inhabited, when I overwhelm you with the surging waters and the mighty waters have covered you,
I will bring you and those going down into the pit with you to the people of long ago; I will cause you to dwell in the lowest place, like the places of old that have been devastated, together with those going down into the pit, so that you may not be inhabited. Then I will glorify the land of the living.
“‘I will bring sudden terror upon you, and you will no longer be. They will search for you, but you will never again be found,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“As for you, son of man, sing a dirge over Tyre,
and say to Tyre,
Your territories are in the heart of the sea,
They made all your planks from the juniper trees of Seʹnir,
They made your oars from oaks of Baʹshan,
Colorful linen from Egypt served as cloth for your sail,
The inhabitants of Siʹdon and of Arʹvad were your rowers.
The experienced and skilled men of Geʹbal caulked your seams.
Men of Persia, Lud, and Put were in your army, your men of war.
The men of Arʹvad in your army were stationed on your walls all around,
“‘“Tarʹshish did business with you because of your abundant wealth. They exchanged silver, iron, tin, and lead for your goods.
Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, and Meʹshech traded with you, exchanging slaves and articles of copper for your merchandise.
The house of To·garʹmah exchanged horses and steeds and mules for your goods.
The people of Deʹdan traded with you; you employed merchants on many islands; they gave ivory tusks and ebony as your tribute.
Eʹdom did business with you because of the abundance of your products. They gave turquoise, purple wool, colorful embroidery, fine fabric, corals, and rubies in exchange for your goods.
“‘“Judah and the land of Israel traded with you, giving the wheat of Minʹnith, choice foods, honey, oil, and balsam in exchange for your goods.
“‘“Damascus did business with you because of the abundance of your products and all your wealth, trading the wine of Helʹbon and wool of Zaʹhar.
Veʹdan and Jaʹvan from Uʹzal gave wrought iron, cassia, and cane in exchange for your goods.
Deʹdan traded with you in saddlecloths for riding.
You employed the Arabs and all the chieftains of Keʹdar, who were merchants of lambs and rams and goats.
The merchants of Sheʹba and Raʹa·mah traded with you; they gave all sorts of the finest perfumes, precious stones, and gold in exchange for your goods.
Haʹran, Canʹneh, Eʹden, the merchants of Sheʹba, Asʹshur, and Chilʹmad traded with you.
In your marketplace they traded beautiful garments, cloaks made of blue material and colorful embroidery, and multicolored carpets, all bound and secured with ropes.
The ships of Tarʹshish were the caravans for your merchandise,
Your rowers have brought you into heavy seas;
Your wealth, your goods, your merchandise, your mariners, and your sailors,
When your sailors cry out, the coastlands will shudder.
All the oarsmen, the mariners, and the seamen
They will raise their voices and cry out bitterly over you
They will make themselves bald and put on sackcloth;
In their lamentation they will sing a dirge and chant over you:
When your goods came in from the open sea, you satisfied many peoples.
Now you have been wrecked in the open sea, in the deep waters,
All the inhabitants of the islands will stare at you in amazement,
The merchants among the nations will whistle over what happened to you.
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, tell the leader of Tyre, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
Look! You are wiser than Daniel.
You have made yourself wealthy by your wisdom and your discernment,
Your skillful trading brought you great wealth,
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
I am bringing foreigners against you, the most ruthless of the nations,
They will bring you down to the pit,
Will you still say, ‘I am a god,’ to the one killing you?
‘By the hand of foreigners, you will die the death of the uncircumcised ones,
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, sing a dirge concerning the king of Tyre, and tell him, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
You were in Eʹden, the garden of God.
I assigned you as the anointed covering cherub.
You were faultless in your ways from the day you were created
Because of your abundant trade,
Your heart became haughty because of your beauty.
Because of your great guilt and your dishonest trading, you have profaned your sanctuaries.
All who knew you among the peoples will stare at you in amazement.
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward Siʹdon, and prophesy against her.
You should say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
I will send pestilence into her and blood will flow in her streets.
“‘“Then the house of Israel will no longer be surrounded by injurious briars and painful thorns, those who treat them with scorn; and people will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “When I regather the house of Israel from among the peoples where they were scattered, I will be sanctified among them in the eyes of the nations. And they will dwell on their land that I gave to my servant Jacob.
They will dwell on it in security and build houses and plant vineyards, and they will dwell in security when I execute judgment on all those around them who treat them with scorn; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah their God.”’”
In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the th day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him and against all Egypt.
Speak these words: ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
But I will put hooks in your jaws and cause the fish of your Nile to cling to your scales.
I will abandon you in the desert, you and all the fish of your Nile.
Then all the inhabitants of Egypt will have to know that I am Jehovah,
When they grasped your hand, you were crushed,
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am bringing a sword upon you, and I will cut off from you both man and beast.
The land of Egypt will become a desolate and devastated place; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah, for you have said, ‘The Nile River belongs to me; I am the one who made it.’
So I am against you and against your Nile, and I will make the land of Egypt devastated and dry, a desolate wasteland, from Migʹdol to Sy·eʹne to the boundary of E·thi·oʹpi·a.
Neither man nor livestock will pass through it on foot, and it will not be inhabited for  years.
I will make the land of Egypt the most desolate of lands, and its cities will be the most desolate of cities for  years; and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the lands.”
“‘For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “After  years I will gather back the Egyptians from the peoples where they were scattered;
I will bring the Egyptian captives back to the land of Pathʹros, to the land of their origin, and there they will become an insignificant kingdom.
Egypt will become lower than the other kingdoms and will no longer dominate the other nations, and I will make them so small that they will not be able to subdue other nations.
It will never again be a source of confidence for the house of Israel, but it will only remind them of their error in turning to the Egyptians for help. And they will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’”
Now in the th year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon made his army labor greatly against Tyre. Every head became bald, and every shoulder was rubbed bare. But he and his army received no wages for the labor he expended on Tyre.
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘Here I am giving the land of Egypt to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will carry off its wealth and take much spoil and plunder from it; and it will become wages for his army.’
“‘As compensation for his labor against her, I will give him the land of Egypt because they acted for me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“In that day I will cause a horn to sprout for the house of Israel, and I will give you an opportunity to speak among them; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
For the day is near, yes, a day of Jehovah is near.
A sword will come against Egypt, and panic will overtake E·thi·oʹpi·a when the slain fall in Egypt;
E·thi·oʹpi·a, Put, Lud, and all the mixed populations,
This is what Jehovah says:
‘They will be made the most desolate of lands, and its own cities will become the most devastated cities.
And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I set a fire in Egypt and all its allies are crushed.
In that day I will send messengers in ships to make self-confident E·thi·oʹpi·a tremble; panic will seize them in the day that is coming upon Egypt, for it will surely come.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will bring an end to Egypt’s hordes by the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon.
He and his troops, the most ruthless of the nations, will be brought in to destroy the land. They will draw their swords against Egypt and fill the land with the slain.
I will turn the canals of the Nile into dry ground and will sell the land into the hand of wicked men. I will make the land and everything in it desolate by the hand of foreigners. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will also destroy the disgusting idols and bring an end to the worthless gods of Noph. There will no longer be a prince from the land of Egypt, and I will put fear in the land of Egypt.
I will desolate Pathʹros and set a fire in Zoʹan and execute judgment on No.
I will pour out my rage on Sin, the stronghold of Egypt, and destroy the population of No.
I will set a fire in Egypt; and Sin will be seized with terror and No will be broken through and Noph will face attack in broad daylight!
The young men of On and Pi·beʹseth will fall by the sword, and the cities will go into captivity.
In Te·haphʹne·hes the day will grow dark when I break the yoke bars of Egypt there. Her arrogant power will come to an end, clouds will cover her, and her towns will go into captivity.
I will execute judgment on Egypt, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
And in the th year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt; it will not be bound up to be healed or wrapped with a bandage to make it strong enough to take up the sword.”
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, and I will break his arms, the strong one and the broken one, and I will make the sword fall from his hand.
Then I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the lands.
I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon and put my sword into his hand, and I will break the arms of Pharʹaoh, and he will groan loudly like a dying man before him.
I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, but the arms of Pharʹaoh will fall limp; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon and he wields it against the land of Egypt.
And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the lands, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
In the th year, in the third month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, say to Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and to his hordes,
There was an As·syrʹi·an, a cedar in Lebʹa·non,
The waters made it grow big, the deep springs of water caused it to grow high.
That is why it grew taller than all the other trees of the field.
All the birds of the sky nested in its boughs,
It became majestic in beauty and in the length of its branches,
No other cedars in the garden of God could compare to it.
I made it beautiful, with abundant foliage,
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because it became so tall, lifting its top among the clouds, and its heart became arrogant because of its height,
I will hand it over to the mighty ruler of the nations. He will surely act against it, and I will reject it for its wickedness.
And foreigners, the most ruthless of the nations, will cut it down, and they will abandon it on the mountains, and its foliage will fall in all the valleys, and its branches will lie broken in all the streams of the land. All the peoples of the earth will depart from its shade and abandon it.
All the birds of the sky will live on its fallen trunk, and all the wild animals of the field on its branches.
This is so that no tree near the waters should grow so tall or lift up its top among the clouds and that no well-watered tree may reach up to them in height. For they will all be given over to death, to the land down below, along with the sons of mankind, who are going down into the pit.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘On the day it goes down to the Grave, I will cause a mourning. Therefore, I will cover over the deep waters and hold back its streams so that the abundant waters are restrained. I will darken Lebʹa·non because of it, and the trees of the field will all wither away.
At the sound of its downfall, I will cause nations to shudder when I bring it down to the Grave along with all those going down into the pit, and all the trees of Eʹden, the choicest and the best of Lebʹa·non, all that are well-watered, will be comforted in the land down below.
They have gone down to the Grave with him, to those slain by the sword, together with his supporters who lived in his shadow among the nations.’
“‘Which of the trees of Eʹden was like you in glory and greatness? But you will certainly be brought down with the trees of Eʹden to the land down below. You will lie down among the uncircumcised ones, with those slain by the sword. This will happen to Pharʹaoh and all his hordes,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And in the th year, in the th month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, sing a dirge concerning Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, and say to him,
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
I will abandon you on the land;
I will cast your flesh on the mountains
I will drench the land with your gushing blood up to the mountains,
‘And when you are extinguished I will cover the heavens and darken their stars.
I will darken all the shining luminaries in the heavens because of you,
‘I will distress the hearts of many peoples when I lead your captives to other nations,
I will cause many peoples to be awestruck,
For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
I will cause your hordes to fall by the swords of mighty warriors,
I will destroy all her livestock beside her abundant waters,
‘At that time I will clear up their waters,
‘When I make Egypt a desolate wasteland, a land stripped of all that filled it,
This is a dirge, and people will certainly chant it;
Then in the th year, on the th day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, wail over the hordes of Egypt and bring her down to the land below, her and the daughters of mighty nations, with those going down into the pit.
“‘Whom do you surpass in beauty? Go down, and lie with the uncircumcised ones!’
“‘They will fall among those slain by the sword. She has been given to the sword; drag her away along with all her hordes.
“‘From the depths of the Grave the mightiest warriors will speak to him and his helpers. They will certainly go down and will lie just like the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.
As·syrʹi·a is there with all her assembly. Their graves are all around him, all of them fallen by the sword.
Her graves are in the depths of the pit, and her assembly is all around her grave, all of them struck down by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living.
“‘Eʹlam is there with all her hordes around her grave, all of them fallen by the sword. They have gone down uncircumcised to the land below, those who caused terror in the land of the living. Now they will bear their shame with those going down into the pit.
They have made a bed for her among the slain, along with all her hordes around her graves. All of them are uncircumcised, slain by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living; and they will bear their shame with those going down into the pit. He has been put among the slain.
“‘There is where Meʹshech and Tuʹbal and all their hordes are. Their graves are all around him. All of them are uncircumcised, pierced through by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living.
Will they not lie with mighty uncircumcised warriors who have fallen, who went down to the Grave with their weapons of war? And they will put their swords under their heads and their sins on their bones, because these mighty warriors terrorized the land of the living.
But as for you, you will be crushed among the uncircumcised ones, and you will lie with those who were slain by the sword.
“‘Eʹdom is there, her kings and all her chieftains, who despite their mightiness, were laid among those slain by the sword; they too will lie with the uncircumcised ones and with those going down into the pit.
“‘There all the princes of the north are, along with all the Si·doʹni·ans, who have gone down in disgrace with the slain, despite the terror caused by their mightiness. They will lie uncircumcised with those who were slain by the sword and will bear their shame with those going down into the pit.
“‘Pharʹaoh will see all of these, and he will be comforted over all that happened to his hordes; Pharʹaoh and all his army will be slain by the sword,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘Because he caused terror in the land of the living, Pharʹaoh and all his hordes will be laid to rest with the uncircumcised, with those slain by the sword,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, speak to the sons of your people, and say to them,
and he sees the sword coming upon the land and blows the horn and warns the people.
If someone hears the sound of the horn but does not heed the warning and a sword comes and takes his life, his blood will be on his own head.
He heard the sound of the horn, but he did not heed the warning. His blood will be upon himself. If he had heeded the warning, his life would have been saved.
“‘But if the watchman sees the sword coming and he does not blow the horn and the people receive no warning and a sword comes and takes the life of one of them, that person will die for his own error, but I will ask his blood back from the watchman.’
“As for you, son of man, I have appointed you as a watchman to the house of Israel; and when you hear a word from my mouth you must warn them from me.
When I say to someone wicked, ‘Wicked one, you will surely die!’ but you do not speak out to warn the wicked one to change his course, he will die as a wicked man because of his own error, but I will ask his blood back from you.
But if you warn someone wicked to turn back from his way and he refuses to change his course, he will die for his error, but you will certainly save your own life.
“And you, son of man, say to the house of Israel, ‘You have said: “Our revolts and our sins weigh heavily upon us, causing us to waste away; so how will we keep living?”’
Tell them, ‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “I take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that someone wicked changes his way and keeps living. Turn back, turn back from your bad ways, for why should you die, O house of Israel?”’
“And you, son of man, tell the sons of your people, ‘The righteousness of the righteous man will not save him when he revolts; nor will the wickedness of the wicked man make him stumble when he turns away from his wickedness; nor will anyone righteous be able to keep living because of his righteousness in the day that he sins.
When I say to the righteous one: “You will surely keep living,” and he trusts in his own righteousness and does what is wrong, none of his righteous acts will be remembered, but he will die for the wrong that he has done.
“‘And when I say to the wicked one: “You will surely die,” and he turns away from his sin and does what is just and righteous,
and the wicked one returns what was taken in pledge and pays back what was taken by robbery, and he walks in the statutes of life by not doing what is wrong, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
None of the sins he committed will be held against him. For doing what is just and righteous, he will surely keep living.’
“But your people have said, ‘The way of Jehovah is unjust,’ when it is actually their way that is unjust.
“When someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, he must die for it.
But when someone wicked turns away from his wickedness and does what is just and righteous, he will keep living for doing so.
“But you have said, ‘The way of Jehovah is unjust.’ I will judge each of you according to his ways, O house of Israel.”
At length in the th year, in the tenth month, on the fifth day of the month of our exile, a man who had escaped from Jerusalem came to me and said: “The city has been struck down!”
Now the evening before the escaped man came, the hand of Jehovah had come upon me, and he had opened my mouth before the man came to me in the morning. So my mouth was opened, and I was no longer speechless.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, the inhabitants of these ruins are saying concerning the land of Israel, ‘Abraham was just one man, and yet he took possession of the land. But we are many; surely the land has been given to us as a possession.’
“Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “You are eating food with the blood, and you lift up your eyes to your disgusting idols, and you keep shedding blood. So why should you possess the land?
You have relied on your sword, you engage in detestable practices, and each of you has defiled his neighbor’s wife. So why should you possess the land?”’
“This is what you should say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “As surely as I am alive, those living in the ruins will fall by the sword; those in the open field, I will give as food to the wild beasts; and those in the strongholds and the caves will die by disease.
I will make the land an utterly desolate wasteland, and its arrogant pride will be brought to an end, and the mountains of Israel will be desolated, with no one passing through.
And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I make the land an utterly desolate wasteland because of all the detestable things that they have done.”’
“As for you, son of man, your people are speaking with one another about you beside the walls and in the doorways of the houses. They are saying to each other, each to his brother, ‘Come, and let us hear the word that comes from Jehovah.’
They will crowd in to sit before you as my people; and they will hear your words, but they will not do them. For with their mouth they flatter you, but their heart is greedy for dishonest gain.
Look! You are to them like a romantic love song, sung with a beautiful voice and skillfully played on a stringed instrument. They will hear your words, but no one will act on them.
And when it comes true—and it will come true—they will have to know that a prophet has been among them.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel. Prophesy, and say to the shepherds, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the shepherds of Israel, who have been feeding themselves! Is it not the flock that the shepherds should feed?
You eat the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, and you slaughter the fattest animal, but you do not feed the flock.
You have not strengthened the weak or healed the sick or bandaged the injured or brought back the strays or looked for the lost; rather, you have ruled them with harshness and tyranny.
So they were scattered because there was no shepherd; they were scattered and became food for every wild beast of the field.
My sheep were straying on all the mountains and on every high hill; my sheep were scattered over all the surface of the earth, with no one searching for them or seeking to find them.
“‘“Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah:
‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “because my sheep have become prey, food for every wild beast of the field, for there was no shepherd, and my shepherds did not search for my sheep; rather, they kept feeding themselves and did not feed my sheep,”’
therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I am against the shepherds, and I will demand an accounting of them for my sheep, and I will dismiss them from feeding my sheep, and the shepherds will no longer feed themselves. I will rescue my sheep from their mouth, and they will no longer be food for them.’”
“‘For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am, and I myself will search for my sheep, and I will care for them.
I will care for my sheep like a shepherd who has found his scattered sheep and is feeding them. I will rescue them from all the places where they were scattered in the day of clouds and thick gloom.
I will bring them out from the peoples and collect them together from the lands and bring them into their land and feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the streams and by all the dwelling places of the land.
In a good pasture I will feed them, and the land where they graze will be on Israel’s high mountains. They will lie down there in a good grazing land, and they will feed on choice pastures on the mountains of Israel.”
“‘“I myself will feed my sheep, and I myself will make them lie down,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“The lost one I will search for, the stray I will bring back, the injured I will bandage, and the weak I will strengthen; but the fat one and the strong one I will annihilate. I will feed that one with judgment.”
“‘As for you, my sheep, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I am about to judge between one sheep and another sheep, between the rams and the male goats.
Is it not enough for you to feed on the very best pastures? Must you also trample the rest of your pastures with your feet? And after drinking the clearest water, must you foul the water by stamping with your feet?
Should my sheep now feed on the pasture trampled by your feet and drink the water befouled by the stamping of your feet?”
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to them: “Here I am, and I myself will judge between a fat sheep and a lean sheep,
for with your flank and shoulder you kept pushing, and with your horns you kept shoving all the sick ones until you had scattered them abroad.
And I will save my sheep, and they will no longer become something to prey upon; and I will judge between a sheep and a sheep.
I will raise up one shepherd over them, my servant David, and he will feed them. He himself will feed them and become their shepherd.
And I, Jehovah, will become their God, and my servant David a chieftain among them. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.
“‘“And I will make a covenant of peace with them, and I will rid the land of vicious wild beasts, so that they may dwell securely in the wilderness and sleep in the forests.
I will make them and the area around my hill a blessing, and I will cause the rain to fall at the proper time. Blessings will pour down like the rains.
The trees of the field will yield their fruit, and the soil will give its produce, and they will dwell securely on the land. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I break their yoke bars and rescue them from those who enslaved them.
They will no longer become something for the nations to prey upon, and the wild beasts of the earth will not devour them, and they will dwell in security, with no one to make them afraid.
“‘“I will establish for them a plantation of fame, and they will no longer die from famine in the land, and they will no longer be humiliated by the nations.
‘Then they will have to know that I, Jehovah their God, am with them and that they, the house of Israel, are my people,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
“‘As for you, my sheep, the sheep that I care for, you are but men, and I am your God,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward the mountainous region of Seʹir, and prophesy against it.
Say to it, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O mountainous region of Seʹir, and I will stretch out my hand against you and make you a desolate wasteland.
I will turn your cities into ruins, and you will become a desolate wasteland; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
For you showed unrelenting hostility, and you gave the Israelites over to the sword at the time of their disaster, at the time of their final punishment.”’
“‘Therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will prepare you for bloodshed, and bloodshed will pursue you. Since it was blood that you hated, bloodshed will pursue you.
I will make the mountainous region of Seʹir a desolate wasteland, and I will cut off from it anyone passing through and anyone returning.
I will fill its mountains with the slain; and those slain by the sword will fall on your hills, in your valleys, and in all your streams.
I will make you a perpetual desolation, and your cities will not be inhabited; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“Because you said, ‘These two nations and these two lands will become mine, and we will take possession of both,’ even though Jehovah himself was there,
‘therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will deal with you according to the same anger and jealousy that you displayed in your hatred toward them; and I will make myself known among them when I judge you.
You will then have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have heard all the insolent things you spoke against the mountains of Israel when you said, “They have been laid desolate and have been given to us to devour.”
And you spoke arrogantly against me, and you multiplied your words against me. I heard it all.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The whole earth will rejoice when I will make you a desolate wasteland.
Just as you rejoiced when the inheritance of the house of Israel was laid desolate, that is how I will deal with you. You will become a desolate ruin, O mountainous region of Seʹir, yes, all of Eʹdom; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
“As for you, son of man, prophesy about the mountains of Israel and say, ‘O mountains of Israel, hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “The enemy has said against you, ‘Aha! Even the ancient high places have become our possession!’”’
“So prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because they have desolated and attacked you from every direction, so that you would become a possession of the survivors from among the nations and people keep talking about you and slandering you,
therefore, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah! This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the mountains and the hills, to the streams and the valleys, to the ruins that were desolated, and to the abandoned cities that have been plundered and ridiculed by the survivors of the nations around them;
to these the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the fire of my zeal I will speak against the survivors of the nations and against all Eʹdom, those who with great rejoicing and utter scorn have claimed my land as their own possession, to take over its pastures and to plunder it.’”’
“So prophesy concerning the land of Israel, and say to the mountains and to the hills, to the streams and to the valleys, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Look! I will speak in my zeal and in my rage, because you have borne humiliation by the nations.”’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I myself raise my hand in an oath that the surrounding nations will themselves bear their own shame.
But you, O mountains of Israel, will produce branches and bear your fruitage for my people Israel, for they will soon return.
For I am with you, and I will turn toward you, and you will be cultivated and sown with seed.
I will multiply your people—the whole house of Israel, all of it—and the cities will be inhabited and the ruins will be rebuilt.
Yes, I will multiply your people and your livestock; they will increase and be fruitful. And I will cause you to be inhabited as you were formerly, and I will make you prosper more than in the past; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
I will cause people—my people Israel—to walk upon you, and they will take possession of you. You will become their inheritance, and you will never again make them childless.’”
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because they are saying to you, “You are a land that devours people and bereaves your nations of children,”’
‘therefore, you will no longer devour people or make your nations childless,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘I will not subject you to any more insults of the nations or make you bear the taunts of people, and you will no longer cause your nations to stumble,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, when the house of Israel was dwelling in their land, they made it unclean by their ways and their dealings. Their ways were like the uncleanness of menstruation to me.
So I poured out my rage on them because of the blood that they had shed upon the land and because they made the land unclean with their disgusting idols.
So I scattered them among the nations and dispersed them among the lands. I judged them according to their way and according to their dealings.
But when they came to those nations, people profaned my holy name by saying about them, ‘These are the people of Jehovah, but they had to leave his land.’
So I will show concern for my holy name, which the house of Israel profaned among the nations where they have gone.”
“Therefore say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Not for your sakes am I acting, O house of Israel, but for my holy name, which you profaned among the nations where you have gone.”’
‘I will certainly sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the nations, which you profaned among them; and the nations will have to know that I am Jehovah,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘when I am sanctified among you before their eyes.
I will take you from the nations and gather you back from all the lands and bring you into your land.
I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you will become clean; I will cleanse you from all your uncleanness and from all your disgusting idols.
I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit inside you. I will remove the heart of stone from your body and give you a heart of flesh.
I will put my spirit inside you, and I will cause you to walk in my regulations, and you will observe and carry out my judicial decisions.
Then you will dwell in the land that I gave to your forefathers, and you will be my people and I will be your God.’
“‘I will save you from all your uncleanness and summon the grain and make it abound, and I will not bring famine upon you.
I will make the fruitage of the tree and the produce of the field abound, so that you may never again suffer the disgrace of famine among the nations.
Then you will remember your evil ways and your deeds that were not good, and you will loathe yourselves because of your guilt and your detestable practices.
But know this: I am not doing this for your sakes,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Instead, be ashamed and feel humiliated because of your ways, O house of Israel.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the day that I cleanse you from all your guilt, I will cause the cities to be inhabited and the ruins to be rebuilt.
The desolate land that was lying desolate for everyone passing by to see will be cultivated.
And people will say: “The desolate land has become like the garden of Eʹden, and the cities that were in ruins and desolate and torn down are now fortified and inhabited.”
And the nations that are left remaining around you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have built what was torn down, and I have planted what was desolate. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken, and I have done it.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will also let the house of Israel ask me to do this for them: I will multiply their people like a flock.
Like the flock of holy ones, like the flock of Jerusalem during her festivals, the cities that were in ruins will become full of flocks of people; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and by his spirit Jehovah took me and set me down in the middle of the valley plain, and it was full of bones.
He had me pass all around them, and I saw that there were very many bones lying in the valley plain, and they were very dry.
He asked me: “Son of man, can these bones come to life?” To that I said: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you are the one who knows.”
So he said to me: “Prophesy over these bones, and say to them, ‘You dry bones, hear the word of Jehovah:
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to these bones: “I will cause breath to enter you, and you will come to life.
I will put sinews and flesh on you, and I will cover you with skin and put breath in you, and you will come to life; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
Then I prophesied just as I had been commanded. As soon as I prophesied, there was a noise, a rattling sound, and the bones began to come together, bone to bone.
Then I saw sinews and flesh come on them, and skin covered over them. But there was still no breath in them.
He then said to me: “Prophesy to the wind. Prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “From the four winds come in, O wind, and blow upon these people who were killed, so that they may come to life.”’”
So I prophesied just as he commanded me, and breath came into them, and they began to live and to stand on their feet, an extremely large army.
Then he said to me: “Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. Here they are saying, ‘Our bones are dry, and our hope has perished. We are completely cut off.’
So prophesy and say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will open your graves and raise you up from your graves, my people, and bring you to the land of Israel.
And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I open your graves and when I raise you up out of your graves, O my people.”’
‘I will put my spirit in you and you will come to life, and I will settle you on your land; and you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have spoken and I have done it,’ declares Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“And you, son of man, take a stick and write on it, ‘For Judah and for the people of Israel who are with him.’ Then take another stick and write on it, ‘For Joseph, the stick of Eʹphra·im, and all the house of Israel who are with him.’
Then bring them close to each other so that they become just one stick in your hand.
When your people say to you, ‘Will you not tell us what these things mean?’
tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Eʹphra·im, and the tribes of Israel who are with him, and I will join them to the stick of Judah; and I will make them one stick, and they will become one in my hand.”’
The sticks that you write on should be in your hand for them to see.
“Then tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take the Israelites from among the nations where they have gone, and I will collect them together from every direction and bring them to their land.
I will make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel, and one king will rule over all of them, and they will no longer be two nations; nor will they be divided any longer into two kingdoms.
They will no longer defile themselves with their disgusting idols and their detestable practices and all their transgressions. I will save them from all their unfaithfulness by which they have sinned, and I will cleanse them. They will be my people, and I myself will be their God.
“‘“My servant David will be their king, and they will all have one shepherd. They will walk in my judicial decisions and carefully observe my statutes.
They will dwell on the land that I gave to my servant, to Jacob, where your forefathers lived, and they will dwell on it forever, they and their children and their children’s children; and David my servant will be their chieftain forever.
“‘“And I will make a covenant of peace with them; it will be an eternal covenant with them. I will establish them and make them many and place my sanctuary among them forever.
My tent will be with them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people.
And the nations will have to know that I, Jehovah, am sanctifying Israel when my sanctuary is in their midst forever.”’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, set your face against Gog of the land of Maʹgog, the head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal, and prophesy against him.
Say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O Gog, head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal.
I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws and bring you out with all your army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in splendor, a vast assembly with large shields and bucklers, all of them wielding swords;
Persia, E·thi·oʹpi·a, and Put are with them, all of them with buckler and helmet;
Goʹmer and all its troops, the house of To·garʹmah from the remotest parts of the north, along with all its troops—many peoples are with you.
“‘“Be ready, prepare yourselves, you with all your armies that are assembled with you, and you will be their commander.
“‘“You will be given attention after many days. In the final part of the years you will invade the land whose people have been restored from the ravages of the sword, collected together out of many peoples onto the mountains of Israel, which had long been lying devastated. The inhabitants of this land were restored from the peoples, and all of them dwell in security.
You will come against them like a storm, and you will cover the land like clouds, you and all your troops and many peoples with you.”’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In that day thoughts will come into your heart, and you will devise an evil plan.
You will say: “I will invade the land of unprotected settlements. I will come against those living in security, without disturbance, all of them living in settlements unprotected by walls, bars, or gates.”
It will be to take much spoil and plunder, to attack the devastated places that are now inhabited and a people regathered from the nations, who are accumulating wealth and property, those who are living in the center of the earth.
“‘Sheʹba and Deʹdan, the merchants of Tarʹshish and all its warriors will say to you: “Are you invading to get much spoil and plunder? Have you assembled your armies to carry off silver and gold, to take wealth and property, to seize a very great spoil?”’
“So prophesy, son of man, and say to Gog, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “On that day when my people Israel are dwelling in security, will you not know it?
You will come from your place, from the remotest parts of the north, you and many peoples with you, all of them riding on horses, a great assembly, a vast army.
Like clouds covering the land, you will come against my people Israel. In the final part of the days I will bring you against my land so that the nations may know me when I sanctify myself through you before their eyes, O Gog.”’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Are you not the same one I spoke about in the former days through my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied for many years that you would be brought against them?’
“‘On that day, the day when Gog invades the land of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘my great rage will flare up.
In my zeal, in the fire of my fury, I will speak; and in that day there will be a great earthquake in the land of Israel.
Because of me the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, the wild beasts of the field, all the reptiles that creep on the ground, and all humans on the surface of the earth will tremble, and the mountains will be thrown down, and the cliffs will fall, and every wall will collapse to the ground.’
“‘I will call for a sword against him on all my mountains,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Every man’s sword will be against his own brother.
I will bring my judgment against him with pestilence and bloodshed; and I will rain down a torrential downpour and hailstones and fire and sulfur on him and on his troops and on the many peoples with him.
And I will certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself and make myself known before the eyes of many nations; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“And you, son of man, prophesy against Gog, and tell him, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I am against you, Gog, head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal.
I will turn you around and lead you and make you come up from the remotest parts of the north and bring you in upon the mountains of Israel.
I will knock your bow out of your left hand and make your arrows fall from your right hand.
On the mountains of Israel you will fall, you and all your troops and the peoples who will be with you. I will give you as food to all kinds of birds of prey and the wild beasts of the field.”’
“‘You will fall on the open field, for I myself have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘And I will send fire against Maʹgog and against those who are inhabiting the islands in security, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.
I will make my holy name known among my people Israel, and I will not allow my holy name to be profaned any longer; and the nations will have to know that I am Jehovah, the Holy One in Israel.’
“‘Yes, this is coming, and it will be done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘This is the day I have spoken about.
The inhabitants of the cities of Israel will go out and make fires with the weapons—the bucklers and shields, the bows and arrows, the war clubs and lances. And they will use them to light fires for seven years.
They will not need to take wood from the field or gather firewood from the forests because they will use the weapons to light fires.’
“‘On that day I will give Gog a burial place there in Israel, in the valley of those who travel east of the sea, and it will block the path of those passing through. That is where they will bury Gog and all his hordes, and they will call it the Valley of Hamon-Gog.
The house of Israel will spend seven months burying them in order to cleanse the land.
All the people of the land will work at burying them, and this will bring them fame in the day that I glorify myself,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘Men will be assigned to pass through the land constantly and bury the bodies left remaining on the surface of the earth, in order to cleanse it. They will continue the search for seven months.
When those who pass through the land see a human bone, they will set up a marker beside it. Then those assigned to do the burying will bury it in the Valley of Hamon-Gog.
And there will also be a city there named Ha·moʹnah. And they will cleanse the land.’
“As for you, son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Say to every sort of bird and to all the wild beasts of the field, “Gather yourselves together and come. Gather all around my sacrifice that I am preparing for you, a great sacrifice on the mountains of Israel. You will eat flesh and drink blood.
You will eat the flesh of mighty ones and drink the blood of the chieftains of the earth—the rams, lambs, goats, and bulls—all the fattened animals of Baʹshan.
You will gorge yourselves on fat and drink blood until you are drunk from the sacrifice that I prepare for you.”’
“‘At my table you will be filled up with horses and charioteers, mighty ones and all sorts of warriors,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘I will display my glory among the nations, and all the nations will see the judgment that I have executed and the power that I have demonstrated among them.
From that day on the house of Israel will have to know that I am Jehovah their God.
And the nations will have to know that the house of Israel went into exile because of their own error, because they were unfaithful to me. So I hid my face from them and handed them over to their enemies, and they all fell by the sword.
I dealt with them according to their uncleanness and their transgressions, and I hid my face from them.’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will restore the captives of Jacob and have mercy on the whole house of Israel; and I will zealously defend my holy name.
After they have been humiliated for all their unfaithfulness toward me, they will dwell securely on their land, with no one to make them afraid.
When I bring them back from the peoples and collect them together from the lands of their enemies, I will also sanctify myself among them before the eyes of many nations.’
“‘They will have to know that I am Jehovah their God when I send them into exile among the nations and then gather them back to their land, not leaving any of them behind.
I will not hide my face from them any longer, for I will pour out my spirit on the house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
In the th year of our exile, at the beginning of the year, on the tenth day of the month, in the th year after the city had fallen, on that very day the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he took me to the city.
By means of visions from God, he brought me to the land of Israel and set me down on a very high mountain, on which there was a structure like a city to the south.
When he brought me there, I saw a man whose appearance was like that of copper. He had a flax cord and a measuring reed in his hand, and he was standing in the gateway.
The man said to me: “Son of man, look closely, listen carefully, and pay attention to everything I show you, for that is why you were brought here. Tell the house of Israel everything that you see.”
I saw a wall surrounding the outside of the temple. In the man’s hand was a measuring reed six cubits long (to each cubit, a handbreadth was added). He began to measure the wall, and its thickness was one reed and its height was one reed.
Then he came to the gate that faced east and climbed its steps. When he measured the threshold of the gate, its width was one reed, and the width of the other threshold was also one reed.
Each guard chamber was one reed long and one reed wide, and there were five cubits between the guard chambers. The threshold of the gate beside the porch of the gate facing the interior measured one reed.
He measured the porch of the gate toward the interior, and it was one reed.
He then measured the porch of the gate, which was eight cubits; and he measured its side pillars, which were two cubits; and the porch of the gate was on the side facing the interior.
There were three guard chambers on each side of the east gate. The three were the same size, and the side pillars on either side were the same size.
Then he measured the width of the entrance of the gate, which was  cubits; and the length of the gate was  cubits.
The partitioned area in front of the guard chambers on either side was one cubit. The guard chambers on both sides were six cubits each.
He then measured the gate from the roof of the one guard chamber to the roof of the other, and it was  cubits wide; one entrance was across from the other entrance.
Then he measured the side pillars, which were  cubits tall, as well as the side pillars in the gates all around the courtyard.
From the front of the entrance of the gate to the front of the porch on the inner side of the gate was  cubits.
There were windows with narrowing frames for the guard chambers and for their side pillars inside the gate on each side. The interior of the porches also had windows on each side, and there were palm-tree figures on the side pillars.
He then brought me into the outer courtyard, and I saw dining rooms and a pavement around the courtyard. There were  dining rooms on the pavement.
The pavement at the side of the gates corresponded to the length of the gates—this was the lower pavement.
Then he measured the distance from the front of the lower gate to the perimeter of the inner courtyard. It was  cubits on the east and on the north.
The outer courtyard had a gate facing north, and he measured its length and its width.
There were three guard chambers on each side. Its side pillars and porch had the same measurements as the first gate. It was  cubits long and  cubits wide.
Its windows, its porch, and its palm-tree figures were the same size as those of the east gate. People could reach it by climbing seven steps, and its porch was in front of them.
There was a gate in the inner courtyard opposite the north gate and one opposite the east gate. He measured the distance from gate to gate, and it was  cubits.
Next he brought me toward the south, and I saw a gate on the south side. He measured its side pillars and its porch, and they were the same size as the others.
There were windows on each side of it and its porch, like the other windows. It was  cubits long and  cubits wide.
There were seven steps leading up to it, and its porch was in front of them. And it had palm-tree figures on its side pillars, one on each side.
The inner courtyard had a gate facing south; he measured southward from gate to gate, and the distance was  cubits.
Next he brought me into the inner courtyard through the south gate; when he measured the south gate, it was the same size as the others.
Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same size as the others. There were windows on each side of it and its porch. It was  cubits long and  cubits wide.
There were porches all around; they were  cubits long and  cubits wide.
Its porch faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it.
When he brought me into the inner courtyard from the east, he measured the gate, and it was the same size as the others.
Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same size as the others, and there were windows on each side of it and its porch. It was  cubits long and  cubits wide.
Its porch faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on both of its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it.
He then brought me into the north gate and measured it; it was the same size as the others.
Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same as the others. It had windows on each side. It was  cubits long and  cubits wide.
Its side pillars faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on both of its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it.
A dining room with its entrance was near the side pillars of the gates, where the whole burnt offerings were washed.
There were two tables on each side of the porch of the gate on which to slaughter the whole burnt offerings, the sin offerings, and the guilt offerings.
On the way up to the north gate, there were two tables outside the entrance. There were also two tables on the other side of the porch of the gate.
There were four tables on each side of the gate—eight tables in all—on which the sacrifices were slaughtered.
The four tables for the whole burnt offering were of hewn stone. They were one and a half cubits long, one and a half cubits wide, and one cubit high. On them were kept the implements used to slaughter the burnt offerings and the sacrifices.
Shelves, one handbreadth wide, were attached all around the interior walls; and the flesh of the gift offerings would be placed on the tables.
Outside the inner gate were the dining rooms for the singers; they were in the inner courtyard near the north gate, facing south. Another dining room was near the east gate, facing north.
He said to me: “This dining room that faces south is for the priests who are responsible for the services in the temple.
The dining room that faces north is for the priests who are responsible for the service of the altar. They are the sons of Zaʹdok, those from the Levites who are assigned to approach Jehovah to minister to him.”
Then he measured the inner courtyard. It was  cubits long and  cubits wide, foursquare. The altar was in front of the temple.
Then he brought me into the porch of the temple, and he measured the side pillar of the porch, and it was five cubits on one side and five cubits on the other side. The width of the gate was three cubits on one side and three cubits on the other side.
Then he brought me into the outer sanctuary, and he measured the side pillars; they were six cubits wide on one side and six cubits wide on the other side.
The entrance was ten cubits wide, and the sidewalls of the entrance were five cubits on one side and five cubits on the other side. He measured its length, which was  cubits, and its width,  cubits.
He then went inside and measured the side pillar of the entrance, and it was two cubits thick, and the entrance was six cubits wide. The sidewalls of the entrance were seven cubits.
Next he measured the room facing the outer sanctuary, and it was  cubits long and  cubits wide. And he said to me: “This is the Most Holy.”
Then he measured the wall of the temple, and it was six cubits thick. The side chambers around the temple were four cubits wide.
The side chambers were three stories high, one on top of the other, with  chambers on each story. There were ledges around the wall of the temple that served as supports for the side chambers, so that the supports did not go into the wall of the temple itself.
On both sides of the temple was a winding passage that widened as it ascended to the upper chambers. The width increased from story to story as one ascended from the lowest story to the uppermost story by passing through the middle story.
I saw that there was a raised platform all around the temple, and the foundations of the side chambers measured a full reed of six cubits to the corner.
The width of the outside wall of the side chambers was five cubits. There was an open space alongside the structure of the side chambers that was part of the temple.
Between the temple and the dining rooms was an area that was  cubits wide on each side.
There was an entrance between the side chambers and the open space on the north side and another entrance on the south side. The width of the open space was five cubits all around.
The building that was on the west facing the open area was  cubits wide and  cubits long; the wall of the building was five cubits thick all around.
He measured the temple, and it was  cubits long. The open area, the building, and its walls were also  cubits long.
The width of the front of the temple facing east and the open area was  cubits.
He measured the length of the building that faced the open area in the rear, along with its galleries on both sides, and it was  cubits.
as well as the thresholds, the windows with narrowing frames, and the galleries that were in those three areas. Near the threshold were wood panels from the floor up to the windows; and the windows were covered.
Measurements were taken above the entrance and in the inner temple and on the outside and on the entire wall all around.
It had carved cherubs and palm-tree figures, with each palm tree between two cherubs, and each cherub had two faces.
The human face was toward the palm tree on one side, and the face of a lion was toward the palm tree on the other side. They were carved this way throughout the entire temple.
From the floor to the area above the entrance were carved cherubs and palm-tree figures on the wall of the sanctuary.
The doorposts of the sanctuary were square. In front of the holy place was something like
a wooden altar that was three cubits high and two cubits long. It had corner posts, and its base and its sides were made of wood. He then said to me: “This is the table that is before Jehovah.”
The outer sanctuary and the holy place each had two doors.
The doors had two swinging leaves, two leaves for each door.
There were carved cherubs and palm-tree figures on the doors of the sanctuary, like those on the walls. There was also a wooden overhang on the front of the porch on the outside.
There were also windows with narrowing frames and palm-tree figures along both sides of the porch, as well as along the side chambers of the temple and the overhangs.
Then he led me to the outer courtyard toward the north. And he brought me to the dining-room block that was next to the open area, north of the adjoining building.
Its length at the north entrance was  cubits, and it was  cubits wide.
It was located between the inner courtyard, which was  cubits wide, and the pavement of the outer courtyard. Its galleries faced each other and were three stories high.
Before the dining rooms was an inner walkway  cubits wide and  cubits long, and their entrances were to the north.
The upper dining rooms of the building were narrower than those in the lower and middle stories, because the galleries took up more of their space.
For they were three stories high, but they had no pillars like the pillars of the courtyards. That is why more floor space was taken away from them than from the lower and middle stories.
The outer stone wall near the dining rooms toward the outer courtyard that faced the other dining rooms was  cubits long.
For the length of the dining rooms that were toward the outer courtyard was  cubits, but for those facing the sanctuary, it was  cubits.
The dining rooms had an entryway on the east side leading up to them from the outer courtyard.
There were also dining rooms inside the stone wall of the courtyard toward the east, near the open area and the building.
There was a walkway before them like that of the northern dining rooms. They were the same length and width, and they had the same exits and layouts. Their entrances
were like the entrances of the dining rooms that were toward the south. There was an entrance at the beginning of the walkway, before the adjacent stone wall toward the east, where one could enter.
Then he said to me: “The dining rooms of the north and the dining rooms of the south that are next to the open area are the holy dining rooms where the priests who are approaching Jehovah eat the most holy offerings. There they place the most holy offerings, the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, because the place is holy.
When the priests enter, they should not go out of the holy place to the outer courtyard without first removing the garments in which they minister, for these are holy. They will clothe themselves with other garments in order to approach the areas permitted to the people.”
When he finished measuring the inner temple area, he led me out by way of the gate that faces east, and he measured the entire area.
He measured the eastern side with the measuring reed. According to the measuring reed, it was  reed lengths from one side to the other.
He measured the northern side, and according to the measuring reed, it was  reed lengths.
He measured the southern side, and according to the measuring reed, it was  reed lengths.
He went around to the western side. He measured  reed lengths with the measuring reed.
He measured it on the four sides. It had a wall all around it that was  reeds long and  reeds wide, to make a division between what is holy and what is for common use.
Then he led me to the gate that is facing east.
There I saw the glory of the God of Israel coming from the east, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters; and the earth was illuminated by his glory.
What I saw was like the vision I had seen when I came to bring the city to ruin, and it appeared to be like what I had seen near the river Cheʹbar; and I fell with my face to the ground.
Then the glory of Jehovah entered the temple through the gate facing the east.
A spirit then raised me up and brought me into the inner courtyard, and I saw that the temple had become full of the glory of Jehovah.
Then I heard someone speaking to me out of the temple, and the man came and stood beside me.
He said to me:
By putting their threshold next to my threshold and their doorpost beside my doorpost, with only a wall between me and them, they defiled my holy name by the detestable things they did, so I exterminated them in my anger.
Now let them put their spiritual prostitution and the carcasses of their kings far away from me, and I will dwell among them forever.
“As for you, son of man, describe the temple to the house of Israel, so that they will feel ashamed because of their errors, and they should study its plan.
If they feel ashamed of all they have done, you should make known to them the ground plan of the temple, its arrangement, its exits, and its entrances. Show them all its ground plans and its statutes, its ground plans and its laws, and write them down before their eyes, so that they may observe all its ground plan and carry out its statutes.
This is the law of the temple. The entire territory all around the top of the mountain is most holy. Look! This is the law of the temple.
“These are the measurements of the altar in cubits (to each cubit a handbreadth was added). Its base is a cubit, and it is a cubit wide. It has a border all around the edge that is one span in width. This is the base of the altar.
From the base on the floor to the lower surrounding ledge is two cubits, and its width is one cubit. From the small surrounding ledge to the big surrounding ledge is four cubits, and its width is a cubit.
The altar hearth is four cubits high, and projecting up from the altar hearth are the four horns.
The altar hearth is square,  cubits long and  cubits wide.
The four sides of the surrounding ledge are  cubits long and  cubits wide; and the surrounding border is half a cubit, and its base is a cubit on all sides.
He then said to me, “Son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘These are the directions to follow when the altar is made, so that whole burnt offerings may be offered and blood may be sprinkled on it.’
“‘You are to give a young bull of the herd as a sin offering to the Levitical priests of the offspring of Zaʹdok, who approach me to minister to me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘You should take some of its blood and put it on the four horns of the altar, on the four corners of the surrounding ledge, and on the border all around, in order to purify it from sin and to make atonement for it.
Then take the young bull, the sin offering, in order to burn it in the appointed place of the temple, outside the sanctuary.
On the second day you will offer a sound male goat as a sin offering; and they will purify the altar from sin just as they purified it from sin with the young bull.’
“‘When you finish purifying it from sin, you will offer a sound young bull of the herd and a sound ram from the flock.
You are to present them to Jehovah, and the priests must throw salt on them and offer them up as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah.
For seven days you will offer a male goat as a daily sin offering, as well as a young bull of the herd and a ram of the flock; you will offer unblemished animals.
For seven days they are to make atonement for the altar, and they must cleanse it and install it.
When the days are completed, on the eighth day and thereafter, the priests will offer your whole burnt offerings and communion sacrifices on the altar; and I will find pleasure in you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
He brought me back by way of the outer gate of the sanctuary facing east, and it was shut.
Then Jehovah said to me: “This gate will remain shut. It is not to be opened, and no human will enter by it; for Jehovah, the God of Israel, has entered through it, so it must remain shut.
However, the chieftain will sit in it to eat bread before Jehovah, for he is a chieftain. He will come in through the porch of the gate, and he will go out through it.”
Then he brought me through the north gate to the front of the temple. When I looked, I saw that the glory of Jehovah had filled the temple of Jehovah. So I fell with my face to the ground.
Then Jehovah said to me: “Son of man, pay attention, watch, and listen carefully to everything I tell you about the statutes and the laws of the temple of Jehovah. Pay close attention to the entryway of the temple and all the exits of the sanctuary.
You must say to the rebellious house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “That is enough of your detestable practices, O house of Israel.
When you bring foreigners who are uncircumcised in heart and flesh into my sanctuary, they profane my temple. You present my bread, fat and blood, while my covenant is being broken because of all your detestable practices.
You have not taken care of my holy things. Instead, you assign others to take care of the duties in my sanctuary.”’
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “No foreigner living in Israel who is uncircumcised in heart and in flesh may enter my sanctuary.”’
“‘But the Levites who strayed far from me when Israel strayed from me to follow their disgusting idols will bear the consequences of their error.
And they will become ministers in my sanctuary to oversee the gates of the temple and to minister at the temple. They will slaughter the whole burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they will stand before the people to minister to them.
Because they ministered to them before their disgusting idols and became a stumbling block causing the house of Israel to sin, that is why I have raised my hand against them in an oath,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and they will bear the consequences of their error.
They will not approach me to serve as my priests or approach any of my holy or most holy things, and they will bear their shame because of the detestable things that they did.
But I will make them caretakers of the responsibilities of the temple, to take care of its service and all the things that should be done in it.’
“‘As for the Levitical priests, the sons of Zaʹdok, who took care of the responsibilities of my sanctuary when the Israelites strayed from me, they will approach me to minister to me, and they will stand before me to offer me the fat and the blood,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘They are the ones who will enter my sanctuary, and they will approach my table to minister to me, and they will take care of their responsibilities to me.
“‘When they come into the gates of the inner courtyard, they should wear linen garments. They should not wear any wool when they minister in the gates of the inner courtyard or inside it.
They should wear linen turbans on their head, and linen shorts should cover their hips. They should not wear anything that makes them perspire.
Before they go out to the outer courtyard—the outer courtyard where the people are—they should remove the garments they were ministering in and place them in the holy dining rooms. Then they will put on other garments, so that they will not transmit holiness to the people with their garments.
They should not shave their head or let the hair of their head grow long. They should trim the hair of their heads.
The priests should not drink wine when they enter the inner courtyard.
They should not take a widow or a divorced woman as a wife; but they may marry either a virgin of the offspring of Israel or the widow of a priest.’
“‘They should instruct my people about the difference between what is holy and what is common; and they will teach them the difference between what is unclean and what is clean.
They should preside as judges in a legal case; they must judge it in harmony with my judicial decisions. They should keep my laws and my statutes regarding all my festivals and sanctify my sabbaths.
They should not approach any dead human, or they will become unclean. However, they may make themselves unclean for their father, mother, son, daughter, brother, or an unmarried sister.
And after the purification of a priest, they should count off seven days for him.
On the day he enters into the holy place, into the inner courtyard, to minister in the holy place, he should present his sin offering,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘And this will be their inheritance: I am their inheritance. You should not give them any possession in Israel, for I am their possession.
They will be the ones to eat the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, and every devoted thing in Israel will become theirs.
The choicest of all the first ripe fruits and every sort of contribution from you will belong to the priests. And you should give the firstfruits of your coarse meal to the priest. This will cause a blessing to rest on your households.
The priests should not eat any bird or animal that was found dead or torn to pieces.’
“‘When you allot the land as an inheritance, you should offer as a contribution to Jehovah a holy portion out of the land. Its length should be , cubits, and its width, , cubits. Its entire area will be a holy portion.
Within this will be a square lot for the holy place measuring  cubits by  cubits, and it will have  cubits as pastures on each side.
Out of this measurement you should measure the length of , and the width of ,, and within it will be the sanctuary, something most holy.
It will be a holy portion of the land for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who approach to minister to Jehovah. It will be a place for their houses and a sacred place for the sanctuary.
“‘For the Levites, the ministers of the temple, there will be a portion , cubits long and , cubits wide, and they will have  dining rooms as a possession.
“‘You should give as the possession of the city an area that is , cubits long (corresponding to the holy contribution) and , cubits wide. It will belong to all the house of Israel.
“‘And for the chieftain there will be land on both sides of the holy contribution and of the area allotted to the city. It will be next to the holy contribution and the possession of the city. It will be on the west side and on the east side. Its length from the western boundary to the eastern boundary will correspond to one of the tribal portions.
This land will become his possession in Israel. My chieftains will no longer mistreat my people, and they will give the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘You have gone far enough, chieftains of Israel!’
‘You should use accurate scales, an accurate eʹphah measure and an accurate bath measure.
There should be a fixed measurement for the eʹphah measure and the bath measure. The bath measure should hold a tenth of a hoʹmer, and the eʹphah measure should hold a tenth of a hoʹmer. The hoʹmer will be the standard for measuring.
The shekel is to be  geʹrahs. And  shekels plus  shekels plus  shekels will make up one maʹneh for you.’
“‘This is the contribution that you should offer: one sixth of an eʹphah from each hoʹmer of wheat and one sixth of an eʹphah from each hoʹmer of barley.
The allowance of the oil is to be based on the bath measure. The bath is a tenth of a cor, and ten baths are a hoʹmer, for ten baths equal a hoʹmer.
And from the flock of the livestock of Israel, one sheep out of every  should be given. These will be for the grain offering, the whole burnt offering, and the communion sacrifices, in order to make atonement for the people,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘All the people of the land will make this contribution to the chieftain in Israel.
But the chieftain will be responsible for the whole burnt offerings, the grain offering, and the drink offering during the festivals, the new moons, the Sabbaths, and all the designated festivals of the house of Israel. He will be the one to provide the sin offering, the grain offering, the whole burnt offering, and the communion sacrifices, in order to make atonement in behalf of the house of Israel.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the first month, on the first day of the month, you should take a sound young bull of the herd, and you are to purify the sanctuary from sin.
The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering and put it on the doorpost of the temple, on the four corners of the surrounding ledge of the altar, and on the doorpost of the gate of the inner courtyard.
That is what you will do on the seventh day of the month because of anyone who sins by mistake or through ignorance; and you are to make atonement for the temple.
“‘In the first month, on the th day of the month, you will observe the festival of the Passover. For seven days unleavened bread should be eaten.
On that day the chieftain will provide a young bull as a sin offering in his own behalf and in behalf of all the people of the land.
For the seven days of the festival he will provide as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah seven sound young bulls and seven sound rams each of the seven days, as well as a male goat each day as a sin offering.
He should also provide as a grain offering an eʹphah for each young bull and an eʹphah for each ram, as well as a hin of oil for each eʹphah.
“‘In the seventh month, on the th day of the month, for seven days during the festival, he should provide the same sin offering, whole burnt offering, grain offering, and oil.’”
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The gate of the inner courtyard that is facing east should remain shut for the six workdays, but on the Sabbath day and on the day of the new moon it should be opened.
The chieftain will enter from outside by way of the porch of the gate, and he will stand by the doorpost of the gate. The priests will offer his whole burnt offering and his communion sacrifices, and he will bow down at the threshold of the gate and then go out. But the gate should not be shut until the evening.
The people of the land will also bow down before Jehovah at the entrance of that gate on the Sabbaths and on the new moons.
“‘The whole burnt offering that the chieftain will present to Jehovah on the Sabbath day should consist of six sound male lambs and a sound ram.
The grain offering will be an eʹphah for the ram and whatever he is able to give for the male lambs, along with a hin of oil with each eʹphah.
On the day of the new moon the offering will consist of a sound young bull of the herd, six male lambs, and a ram; they should be sound ones.
He should offer as a grain offering an eʹphah for the young bull, an eʹphah for the ram, and whatever he can afford for the male lambs. And he should offer a hin of oil with each eʹphah.
“‘When the chieftain enters, he should enter by way of the porch of the gate, and he should go out the same way.
And when the people of the land come in before Jehovah during the festivals, those who come in to worship through the north gate should go out through the south gate, and those who come in through the south gate should go out through the north gate. No one should go back by way of the gate through which he entered, for they should exit through the gate that is opposite them.
As for the chieftain who is among them, he should come in when they come in, and he should go out when they go out.
During the festivals and the festal seasons the grain offering should be an eʹphah for the young bull, an eʹphah for the ram, and whatever he is able to give for the male lambs, along with a hin of oil with each eʹphah.
“‘If the chieftain provides a whole burnt offering or communion sacrifices as a voluntary offering to Jehovah, the gate facing east will be opened for him, and he will provide his whole burnt offering and his communion sacrifices just as he does on the Sabbath day. After he goes out, the gate should be shut behind him.
“‘Each day you should provide a sound male lamb in its first year as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah. You should do this morning by morning.
Along with it, each morning you should provide a sixth of an eʹphah as a grain offering, along with a third of a hin of oil for sprinkling on the fine flour as a regular grain offering to Jehovah. This is a lasting statute.
They must provide the male lamb, the grain offering, and the oil each morning as a regular whole burnt offering.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘If the chieftain gives a gift to each one of his sons as an inheritance, it will become the property of his sons. It is their possession by inheritance.
But if he gives a gift from his inheritance to one of his servants, it will be his until the year of liberty; and then it will return to the chieftain. Only the inheritance of his sons will be permanently theirs.
The chieftain should not take any of the inheritance of the people by forcing them off their property. He should give his sons an inheritance from his own property, so that no one among my people may be driven from his property.’”
Then he brought me in by the entryway that was beside the gate leading to the holy dining rooms of the priests, which faced north, and there I saw a place at the rear toward the west.
He said to me: “This is the place where the priests will boil the guilt offering and the sin offering and where they will bake the grain offering, so that they will not carry anything out to the outer courtyard and transmit holiness to the people.”
He brought me out to the outer courtyard and led me past the four corners of the courtyard, and I saw a courtyard by each corner of the outer courtyard.
At the four corners of the courtyard were small courtyards,  cubits long and  cubits wide. All four of them were the same size.
There were ledges all around the four of them, and beneath the ledges were built places to boil the offerings.
Then he said to me: “These are the houses where the ministers of the temple boil the sacrifice of the people.”
Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple, and there I saw water flowing eastward from under the threshold of the temple, for the front of the temple was facing east. The water was flowing down from under the right side of the temple, south of the altar.
He then led me out by way of the north gate and took me outside and around to the outer gate that is facing east, and I saw water trickling from the right side.
When the man went out toward the east with a measuring line in his hand, he measured off , cubits and had me pass through the water; the water was ankle deep.
Then he measured off another , and had me pass through the water, and it was up to the knees.
When he measured off another ,, it was a torrent that I was unable to walk across, for the water was so deep that one had to swim, a torrent of water that could not be crossed on foot.
He asked me: “Have you seen this, son of man?”
When I returned, I saw that on the bank of the stream were very many trees on both sides.
Then he said to me: “This water flows toward the eastern region and continues down through the Arʹa·bah and enters the sea. When it enters the sea, the water there will be healed.
Swarms of living creatures will be able to live wherever the waters flow. There will be an abundance of fish, because this water will flow there. The seawater will be healed, and everything will live wherever the stream goes.
“Fishermen will stand beside it from En-gedʹi clear to En-egʹla·im, where there will be a drying yard for dragnets. There will be an abundance of many kinds of fish, like the fish of the Great Sea.
“It will have swampy places and marshy places, and these will not be healed. They will be abandoned to salt.
“All sorts of trees for food will grow on both banks of the stream. Their leaves will not wither; nor will their fruitage fail. Each month they will bear new fruit, because the water for them flows from the sanctuary. Their fruitage will serve as food and their leaves for healing.”
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “This is the territory that you will assign as the land inheritance of the  tribes of Israel, and Joseph will have two portions.
You will inherit it and receive equal shares. I swore to give this land to your forefathers, and now it is assigned to you as an inheritance.
“This is the boundary of the land on the northern side: It goes from the Great Sea by the way to Hethʹlon toward Zeʹdad,
Haʹmath, Be·roʹthah, and Sibʹra·im, which is between the territory of Damascus and the territory of Haʹmath, to Haʹzer-hatʹti·con, which is by the boundary of Ha·u·ranʹ.
So the boundary will run from the sea to Haʹzar-eʹnon, along the boundary of Damascus to the north, and the boundary of Haʹmath. This is the northern border.
“The eastern side runs between Ha·u·ranʹ and Damascus and along the Jordan between Gilʹe·ad and the land of Israel. You should measure from the boundary to the eastern sea. This is the eastern border.
“The southern border will be from Taʹmar to the waters of Merʹi·bath-kaʹdesh, then to the Wadi and to the Great Sea. This is the southern border.
“On the western side is the Great Sea, from the boundary up to a point opposite Leʹbo-haʹmath. This is the western border.”
“You are to apportion this land among yourselves, among the  tribes of Israel.
You should distribute it for inheritance among yourselves and to the foreigners residing with you who have had children while living among you; and they will be like native-born Israelites to you. They will receive an inheritance among the tribes of Israel along with you.
You should give the foreign resident an inheritance in the territory of the tribe where he has taken up residence,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“These are the names of the tribes, starting from the northern extremity: Dan’s portion runs along the way of Hethʹlon to Leʹbo-haʹmath to Haʹzar-eʹnan, along the boundary of Damascus northward, beside Haʹmath; and it extends from the eastern to the western border.
Ashʹer’s portion is on the boundary of Dan, from the eastern border to the western border.
Naphʹta·li’s portion is on the boundary of Ashʹer, from the eastern border to the western border.
Ma·nasʹseh’s portion is on the boundary of Naphʹta·li, from the eastern border to the western border.
Eʹphra·im’s portion is on the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh, from the eastern border to the western border.
Reuʹben’s portion is on the boundary of Eʹphra·im, from the eastern border to the western border.
Judah’s portion is on the boundary of Reuʹben, from the eastern border to the western border.
On the boundary of Judah, from the eastern border to the western border, the contribution that you are to set apart should be , cubits wide and correspond to the length of the other tribal portions from the eastern border to the western border. The sanctuary will be in the middle of it.
“The contribution that you are to set apart to Jehovah will be , cubits long and , wide.
This will be the holy contribution for the priests. It will be , cubits on the north side, , on the west, , on the east, and , on the south. The sanctuary of Jehovah will be in the middle of it.
It will be for the sanctified priests from the sons of Zaʹdok, those who took care of their responsibilities toward me and did not go astray when the Israelites and the Levites went astray.
They will have a portion of the contribution of the land set apart as something most holy, on the boundary of the Levites.
“Right next to the territory of the priests, the Levites will have a portion , cubits long and , wide. (The whole length will be , long and , wide.)
They should not sell, exchange, or transfer any of this choicest portion of the land, for it is something holy to Jehovah.
“The remaining area that is , cubits wide alongside the , cubit border will be for common use of the city, for housing and pasture ground. The city will be in the middle of it.
These are the city’s measurements: The northern border is , cubits, the southern border is ,, the eastern border is ,, and the western border is ,.
The pasture ground of the city will be  cubits to the north,  to the south,  to the east, and  to the west.
“The length of the remaining portion will correspond to the holy contribution, , cubits to the east and , to the west. It will correspond to the holy contribution, and its produce will provide food for those serving the city.
Those who are serving the city from all the tribes of Israel will cultivate it.
“The whole contribution is , cubits square. You should set it aside as the holy contribution along with the possession of the city.
“What remains on both sides of the holy contribution and of the possession of the city will belong to the chieftain. It will be alongside the , cubit borders that are east and west of the contribution. It will correspond to those adjoining portions, and it will be for the chieftain. The holy contribution and the sanctuary of the temple will be in the middle of it.
“The possession of the Levites and the possession of the city will be between what belongs to the chieftain. The chieftain’s territory will be between the boundary of Judah and the boundary of Benjamin.
“As for the remaining tribes, Benjamin’s portion is from the eastern border to the western border.
Simʹe·on’s portion is by the boundary of Benjamin, from the eastern border to the western border.
Isʹsa·char’s portion is by the boundary of Simʹe·on, from the eastern border to the western border.
Zebʹu·lun’s portion is by the boundary of Isʹsa·char, from the eastern border to the western border.
Gad’s portion is by the boundary of Zebʹu·lun, from the eastern border to the western border.
The southern border by the boundary of Gad will run from Taʹmar to the waters of Merʹi·bath-kaʹdesh, to the Wadi and on to the Great Sea.
“This is the land that you should distribute as an inheritance to the tribes of Israel, and these will be their portions,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“These will be the exits of the city: The northern side will measure , cubits.
“The gates of the city will be named according to the tribes of Israel. Of the three gates on the north, there is one gate for Reuʹben, one gate for Judah, and one gate for Leʹvi.
“The eastern side will be , cubits long, and there are three gates: one gate for Joseph, one gate for Benjamin, and one gate for Dan.
“The southern side will measure , cubits, with three gates: one gate for Simʹe·on, one gate for Isʹsa·char, and one gate for Zebʹu·lun.
“The western side will be , cubits long, with three gates: one gate for Gad, one gate for Ashʹer, and one gate for Naphʹta·li.
“The perimeter will be , cubits. And the name of the city from that day on will be Jehovah Is There.”
In the third year of the kingship of King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it.
In time Jehovah gave King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah into his hand, along with some of the utensils of the house of the true God, and he brought them to the land of Shiʹnar to the house of his god. He placed the utensils in the treasury of his god.
Then the king ordered Ashʹpe·naz his chief court official to bring some of the Israelites, including those of royal and noble descent.
They were to be youths without any defect, of good appearance, endowed with wisdom, knowledge, and discernment, and capable of serving in the king’s palace. He was to teach them the writing and the language of the Chal·deʹans.
Furthermore, the king assigned to them a daily ration from the king’s delicacies and from the wine he drank. They were to be trained for three years, and at the end of that time they were to enter the king’s service.
Now among them were some from the tribe of Judah: Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah.
And the principal court official assigned names to them; he gave to Daniel the name Bel·te·shazʹzar, to Han·a·niʹah the name Shaʹdrach, to Mishʹa·el the name Meʹshach, and to Az·a·riʹah the name A·bedʹne·go.
But Daniel resolved in his heart that he would not defile himself with the king’s delicacies or with the wine he drank. So he asked the principal court official for permission not to defile himself in this way.
And the true God caused the principal court official to show Daniel favor and mercy.
But the principal court official said to Daniel: “I am afraid of my lord the king, who has assigned your food and drink. What if he should see you looking worse in appearance than the other youths of your age? You would make me guilty before the king.”
But Daniel said to the guardian whom the principal court official had appointed over Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah:
“Please, test your servants for ten days, and let us be given some vegetables to eat and water to drink;
In the second year of his kingship, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had a number of dreams, and he was so agitated that he could not sleep.
So the king gave the order to summon the magic-practicing priests, the conjurers, the sorcerers, and the Chal·deʹans to tell the king his dreams. So they came in and stood before the king.
Then the king said to them: “I have had a dream, and I am agitated because I want to know what I dreamed.”
The Chal·deʹans replied to the king in the Ar·a·maʹic language: “O king, may you live on forever. Relate the dream to your servants, and we will tell the interpretation.”
The king answered the Chal·deʹans: “This is my final word: If you do not make the dream known to me, along with its interpretation, you will be dismembered, and your houses will be turned into public latrines.
But if you do tell the dream and its interpretation, you will receive from me gifts and a reward and great honor. So tell me the dream and its interpretation.”
They answered a second time: “Let the king relate the dream to his servants, and we will tell its interpretation.”
The king replied: “I am well-aware that you are trying to gain time, for you realize what my final word is.
If you do not make the dream known to me, there is only one penalty for all of you. But you have agreed to tell me something false and deceitful until the situation changes. So tell me the dream, and I will know that you can explain its interpretation.”
The Chal·deʹans answered the king: “There is not a man on earth who is able to do what the king demands, for no great king or governor has asked such a thing of any magic-practicing priest or conjurer or Chal·deʹan.
What the king is asking is difficult, and no one exists who could tell the king this except the gods, who do not dwell among mortals.”
At this the king flew into a violent rage and gave the order to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king made an image of gold that was  cubits high and  cubits wide. He set it up on the plain of Duʹra in the province of Babylon.
Then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar sent word to assemble the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the administrators of the provinces to come to the inauguration of the image that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up.
So the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the administrators of the provinces assembled for the inauguration of the image that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up. And they stood in front of the image that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up.
The herald loudly proclaimed: “You are commanded, O peoples, nations, and language groups,
that when you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, bagpipe, and all the other musical instruments, you must fall down and worship the image of gold that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar has set up.
Whoever does not fall down and worship will immediately be thrown into the burning fiery furnace.”
So when all the peoples heard the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, and all the other musical instruments, all the peoples, nations, and language groups fell down and worshipped the image of gold that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up.
Now at that time some of the Chal·deʹans came forward and accused the Jews.
They said to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar: “O king, may you live on forever.
You, O king, gave the command that every man who hears the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, bagpipe, and all the other musical instruments should fall down and worship the image of gold;
and that whoever would not fall down and worship should be thrown into the burning fiery furnace.
But there are certain Jews whom you appointed to administer the province of Babylon: Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go. These men have paid no regard to you, O king. They are not serving your gods, and they refuse to worship the image of gold that you have set up.”
“From King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar to all the peoples, nations, and language groups dwelling in all the earth: May your peace abound!
I am pleased to declare the signs and wonders that the Most High God has performed toward me.
How great are his signs, and how mighty his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his rulership is for generation after generation.
“I, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, was at ease in my house and prospering in my palace.
I saw a dream that made me afraid. As I lay on my bed, the images and visions of my head frightened me.
So I issued an order to bring in before me all the wise men of Babylon so that they could make known to me the interpretation of the dream.
“At that time the magic-practicing priests, the conjurers, the Chal·deʹans, and the astrologers came in. When I told them what the dream was, they could not make its interpretation known to me.
At last there came in before me Daniel, whose name is Bel·te·shazʹzar after the name of my god and in whom there is the spirit of the holy gods, and I told him the dream:
“‘O Bel·te·shazʹzar the chief of the magic-practicing priests, I well know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you and no secret is too difficult for you. So explain to me the visions I saw in my dream and its interpretation.
“‘In the visions of my head while on my bed, I saw a tree in the midst of the earth, and its height was enormous.
The tree grew and became strong, and its top reached the heavens, and it was visible to the ends of the whole earth.
Its foliage was beautiful, and its fruit was abundant, and there was food on it for all. Beneath it the beasts of the field would seek shade, and on its branches the birds of the heavens would dwell, and all creatures would feed from it.
As regards King Bel·shazʹzar, he held a great feast for a thousand of his nobles, and he was drinking wine in front of them.
While under the influence of the wine, Bel·shazʹzar gave an order to bring in the vessels of gold and silver that his father Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken from the temple in Jerusalem, so that the king and his nobles, his concubines and his secondary wives could drink from them.
Then they brought in the gold vessels that had been taken from the temple of the house of God in Jerusalem, and the king and his nobles, his concubines and his secondary wives drank from them.
They drank wine, and they praised the gods of gold and silver, of copper, iron, wood, and stone.
At that very moment the fingers of a man’s hand appeared and began writing on the plaster of the wall of the king’s palace opposite the lampstand, and the king could see the back of the hand as it was writing.
Then the king turned pale and his thoughts terrified him, and his hips shook and his knees began to knock together.
The king called out loudly to summon the conjurers, the Chal·deʹans, and the astrologers. The king said to the wise men of Babylon: “Any man who reads this writing and tells me its interpretation will be clothed with purple, a gold necklace will be placed around his neck, and he will rule as the third one in the kingdom.”
Then all the wise men of the king came in, but they were not able to read the writing or to make known the interpretation to the king.
So King Bel·shazʹzar was very frightened and his face turned pale; and his nobles were perplexed.
Because of the words of the king and his nobles, the queen entered the banqueting hall. The queen said: “O king, may you live on forever. Do not let your thoughts terrify you, nor let your face turn pale.
There is a man in your kingdom who has the spirit of holy gods. In the days of your father, enlightenment and insight and wisdom like the wisdom of gods were found in him. King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar your father appointed him as chief of the magic-practicing priests, conjurers, Chal·deʹans, and astrologers; your father did this, O king.
For Daniel, whom the king named Bel·te·shazʹzar, had an extraordinary spirit and knowledge and insight to interpret dreams, to explain riddles, and to solve knotty problems. Now let Daniel be summoned, and he will tell you the interpretation.”
It seemed good to Da·riʹus to appoint  satraps over the whole kingdom.
Over them were three high officials, one of whom was Daniel; and the satraps would report to them, so that the king would not suffer loss.
Now Daniel was distinguishing himself over the other high officials and the satraps, for there was an extraordinary spirit in him, and the king intended to elevate him over the entire kingdom.
At that time the high officials and the satraps were seeking to find some grounds for accusation against Daniel respecting matters of state, but they could find no grounds for accusation or anything corrupt, for he was trustworthy and no negligence or corruption could be found in him.
These men then said: “We will find in this Daniel no grounds for accusation at all, unless we find it against him in the law of his God.”
So these high officials and satraps went in as a group to the king, and they said to him: “O King Da·riʹus, may you live on forever.
All the royal officials, prefects, satraps, high royal officers, and governors have consulted together to establish a royal decree and to enforce a ban, that for  days whoever makes a petition to any god or man except to you, O king, should be thrown into the lions’ pit.
Now, O king, may you establish the decree and sign it, so that it cannot be changed, according to the law of the Medes and the Persians, which cannot be annulled.”
So King Da·riʹus signed the decree and the ban.
But as soon as Daniel knew that the decree had been signed, he went to his house, which had the windows of his roof chamber open toward Jerusalem. And three times a day he got down on his knees and prayed and offered praise before his God, as he had regularly done prior to this.
At that time those men burst in and found Daniel petitioning and pleading for favor before his God.
So they approached the king and reminded him about the royal ban: “Did you not sign a ban stating that for  days any man who makes a petition to any god or man except to you, O king, should be thrown into the lions’ pit?” The king replied: “The matter is well-established according to the law of the Medes and the Persians, which cannot be annulled.”
In the first year of King Bel·shazʹzar of Babylon, Daniel saw a dream and visions of his head as he lay on his bed. Then he wrote down the dream; he recorded a complete account of the matters.
Daniel declared:
And four huge beasts came out of the sea, each different from the others.
“The first one was like a lion, and it had the wings of an eagle. I watched until its wings were plucked out, and it was lifted up from the earth and was made to stand up on two feet like a man, and it was given the heart of a man.
“And look! another beast, a second one, like a bear. It was raised up on one side, and three ribs were in its mouth between its teeth; and it was told, ‘Get up, eat much flesh.’
“After this I kept watching, and look! another beast, like a leopard, but on its back it had four wings like those of a bird. And the beast had four heads, and it was given authority to rule.
“After this I kept watching in the visions of the night, and I saw a fourth beast, fearsome and terrifying and unusually strong, and it had large iron teeth. It was devouring and crushing, and what was left it trampled down with its feet. It was different from all the other beasts that were prior to it, and it had ten horns.
While I considered the horns, look! another horn, a small one, came up among them, and three of the first horns were plucked up from before it. And look! there were eyes like human eyes in this horn, and there was a mouth speaking arrogantly.
“I kept watching until thrones were set in place and the Ancient of Days sat down. His clothing was white like snow, and the hair of his head was like clean wool. His throne was flames of fire; its wheels were a burning fire.
A stream of fire was flowing and going out from before him. A thousand thousands kept ministering to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The Court took its seat, and books were opened.
“I kept watching at that time because of the sound of the arrogant words that the horn was speaking; I watched until the beast was killed and its body was destroyed and it was given over to be burned in the fire.
But as for the rest of the beasts, their rulerships were taken away, and their lives were prolonged for a time and a season.
In the third year of the kingship of King Bel·shazʹzar, a vision appeared to me, Daniel, after the one that appeared to me previously.
I saw the vision, and as I watched I was in Shuʹshan the citadel, which is in the province of Eʹlam; I viewed the vision, and I was next to the watercourse of Uʹlai.
As I raised my eyes, look! there was a ram standing before the watercourse, and it had two horns. The two horns were tall, but one was higher than the other, and the higher one came up later.
I saw the ram making thrusts to the west and to the north and to the south, and no wild beasts could stand before it, and there was no one who could provide rescue from its power. It did as it pleased and exalted itself.
As I kept watching, look! there was a male goat coming from the west crossing the surface of the whole earth without touching the ground. And the goat had a conspicuous horn between its eyes.
It was coming toward the ram with the two horns, which I had seen standing before the watercourse; it was running toward it in a powerful rage.
I saw it closing in on the ram, and it was filled with bitterness toward it. It struck down the ram and broke its two horns, and the ram was powerless to stand up to it. It threw the ram to the ground and trampled it down, and there was no one to rescue it from its power.
Then the male goat exalted itself exceedingly, but as soon as it became mighty, the great horn was broken; then four conspicuous horns came up instead of the one, toward the four winds of the heavens.
Out of one of them came another horn, a small one, and it grew very great toward the south and toward the east and toward the Decoration.
It grew so great that it reached all the way to the army of the heavens, and it caused some of the army and some of the stars to fall to the earth, and it trampled them down.
It exalted itself even against the Prince of the army, and from him the constant feature was taken away, and the established place of his sanctuary was thrown down.
And an army was given over, together with the constant feature, because of transgression; and it kept throwing truth to the earth, and it acted and had success.
In the first year of Da·riʹus the son of A·has·u·eʹrus—a descendant of the Medes who had been made king over the kingdom of the Chal·deʹans—
in the first year of his reign I, Daniel, discerned by the books the number of years mentioned in the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet to fulfill the desolation of Jerusalem, namely,  years.
So I turned my face to Jehovah the true God, entreating him in prayer, along with fasting and sackcloth and ashes.
I prayed to Jehovah my God and made confession and said:
we have sinned and done wrong and acted wickedly and rebelled; and we have deviated from your commandments and your judgments.
We have not listened to your servants the prophets, who spoke in your name to our kings, our princes, our forefathers, and all the people of the land.
To you, O Jehovah, belongs righteousness, but to us belongs shame as is the case today, to the men of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and all Israel, those nearby and far away, in all the lands to which you dispersed them because they acted unfaithfully toward you.
“O Jehovah, to us belongs shame, to our kings, our princes, and our forefathers, because we have sinned against you.
To Jehovah our God belong mercy and forgiveness, for we have rebelled against him.
We have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God by following his laws that he set before us through his servants the prophets.
All Israel has overstepped your Law and turned away by not obeying your voice, so that you poured out on us the curse and the sworn oath written about in the Law of Moses the servant of the true God, for we have sinned against Him.
He has carried out his words that he spoke against us and against our rulers who ruled over us, by bringing great calamity on us; nothing has ever been done under the whole heavens such as what was done in Jerusalem.
In the third year of King Cyrus of Persia, a revelation was given to Daniel, who was called by the name Bel·te·shazʹzar; and the message was true, and it was about a great conflict. And he understood the message and was given understanding about what he had seen.
In those days I, Daniel, had been mourning for three full weeks.
I ate no rich food, and no meat or wine entered my mouth, and I did not put any oil on myself for three full weeks.
On the th day of the first month, while I was on the bank of the great river, the Tiʹgris,
I looked up and saw a man clothed in linen, and around his waist was a belt of gold from Uʹphaz.
His body was like chrysʹo·lite, his face had the appearance of lightning, his eyes were like fiery torches, his arms and his feet looked like burnished copper, and the sound of his words was like the sound of a multitude.
Only I, Daniel, saw the vision; the men with me did not see the vision. However, a great trembling seized them, and they ran away and hid.
Then I was left by myself, and when I saw this great vision, there was no power left in me and my dignified appearance left me and I lost all strength.
Then I heard the sound of him speaking; but when I heard him speaking, I fell fast asleep with my face to the ground.
But then a hand touched me, and it stirred me to get up on my hands and knees.
Then he said to me:
He then said to me: “Do not be afraid, O Daniel. Your words have been heard from the first day that you gave your heart to understanding and to humbling yourself before your God, and I have come because of your words.
“As for me, in the first year of Da·riʹus the Mede, I stood up to strengthen and fortify him.
What I will tell you now is the truth:
“And a mighty king will stand up and rule with extensive dominion and do as he pleases.
But when he has stood up, his kingdom will be broken and be divided toward the four winds of the heavens, but not to his descendants and not like the dominion with which he ruled; for his kingdom will be uprooted and go to others besides these.
“And the king of the south will become strong, that is, one of his princes; but one will prevail against him and will rule with extensive dominion, greater than that one’s ruling power.
“After some years they will make an alliance, and the daughter of the king of the south will come to the king of the north in order to make an equitable arrangement. But she will not retain the power of her arm; and he will not stand, nor his arm; and she will be given up, she and those bringing her in, and the one who caused her birth, and the one making her strong in those times.
And one from the sprout of her roots will stand up in his position, and he will come to the army and come against the fortress of the king of the north and will take action against them and prevail.
Also with their gods, with their metal images, with their desirable articles of silver and of gold, and with captives, he will come to Egypt. For some years he will stand off from the king of the north,
who will come against the kingdom of the king of the south, but will go back to his own land.
“As for his sons, they will prepare for war and assemble a vast, great army. He will certainly advance and sweep through like a flood. But he will go back, and he will wage war all the way to his fortress.
“And the king of the south will become bitter and will go out and fight with him, that is, with the king of the north; and he will muster a large crowd, but the crowd will be given into that one’s hand.
And the crowd will be carried away. His heart will become exalted, and he will cause tens of thousands to fall; but he will not make use of his strong position.
“During that time Miʹcha·el will stand up, the great prince who is standing in behalf of your people. And there will occur a time of distress such as has not occurred since there came to be a nation until that time. And during that time your people will escape, everyone who is found written down in the book.
And many of those asleep in the dust of the earth will wake up, some to everlasting life and others to reproach and to everlasting contempt.
“And those having insight will shine as brightly as the expanse of heaven, and those bringing the many to righteousness like the stars, forever and ever.
“As for you, Daniel, keep the words secret, and seal up the book until the time of the end. Many will rove about, and the true knowledge will become abundant.”
Then I, Daniel, looked and saw two others standing there, one on this bank of the stream and one on the other bank of the stream.
Then one said to the man clothed in linen, who was up above the waters of the stream: “How long will it be to the end of these marvelous things?”
Then I heard the man clothed in linen, who was up above the waters of the stream, as he raised his right hand and his left hand to the heavens and swore by the One who is alive forever: “It will be for an appointed time, appointed times, and half a time. As soon as the dashing to pieces of the power of the holy people comes to an end, all these things will come to their finish.”
Now as for me, I heard, but I could not understand; so I said: “O my lord, what will be the outcome of these things?”
Then he said: “Go, Daniel, because the words are to be kept secret and sealed up until the time of the end.
Many will cleanse themselves and whiten themselves and will be refined. And the wicked ones will act wickedly, and none of the wicked will understand; but those having insight will understand.
“And from the time that the constant feature has been removed and the disgusting thing that causes desolation has been put in place, there will be , days.
“Happy is the one who keeps in expectation and who arrives at the , days!
The word of Jehovah that came to Ho·seʹa the son of Be·eʹri in the days of Uz·ziʹah, Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jer·o·boʹam son of Joʹash, the king of Israel.
When Jehovah started to speak his word through Ho·seʹa, Jehovah said to Ho·seʹa: “Go, marry a woman of prostitution and have children of prostitution, because by prostitution the land has turned completely away from following Jehovah.”
So he went and married Goʹmer the daughter of Dib·laʹim, and she conceived and bore him a son.
Then Jehovah said to him: “Name him Jezʹre·el, for in a little while I will hold an accounting against the house of Jeʹhu for the acts of bloodshed of Jezʹre·el, and I will put an end to the royal rule of the house of Israel.
In that day I will break the bow of Israel in the Valley of Jezʹre·el.”
She conceived again and gave birth to a daughter. And He told him: “Name her Lo-ru·haʹmah, for I will no longer show mercy to the house of Israel, because I will certainly drive them away.
But I will show mercy to the house of Judah, and I will save them by Jehovah their God; I will not save them by bow or by sword or by war or by horses or by horsemen.”
After weaning Lo-ru·haʹmah, she conceived and gave birth to a son.
Then He said: “Name him Lo-amʹmi, because you are not my people and I will not be yours.
“And the number of the people of Israel will be like the grains of sand of the sea, which cannot be measured or numbered. And in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ it will be said to them, ‘The sons of the living God.’
And the people of Judah and of Israel will be gathered together into unity and will choose for themselves one head and go up out of the land, for great will be the day of Jezʹre·el.
“Say to your brothers, ‘My people!’
Accuse your mother; accuse her,
Or I will strip her naked and make her as in the day she was born,
And to her sons I will not show mercy,
For their mother has committed prostitution.
So I will block your way with a hedge of thorns;
She will chase after her passionate lovers, but she will not overtake them;
She did not recognize that it was I who had given her the grain, the new wine, and the oil,
‘Therefore, I will return and take away my grain in its time
Now I will expose her private parts in full view of her passionate lovers,
I will put an end to all her joy,
And I will ruin her vines and her fig trees, of which she has said:
I will hold an accounting against her for the days when she offered sacrifices to the Baʹal images,
‘So I will persuade her,
Then Jehovah said to me: “Go once again, love the woman who is loved by another man and is committing adultery, just as Jehovah loves the people of Israel while they turn to other gods and love raisin cakes.”
So I purchased her for myself for  silver pieces and a hoʹmer measure and a half of barley.
Then I said to her: “You will remain mine for many days. You must not commit prostitution, and you must not have relations with another man, and I will behave the same way toward you.”
It is because for a long time the people of Israel will dwell without a king, without a prince, without a sacrifice, without a pillar, and without an ephʹod and teraphim statues.
Afterward the people of Israel will come back and look for Jehovah their God and for David their king, and they will come trembling to Jehovah and to his goodness in the final part of the days.
Hear the word of Jehovah, O people of Israel,
False oaths and lying and murder
That is why the land will mourn
“However, let no man contend or reprove,
So you will stumble in broad daylight,
My people will be silenced, because there is no knowledge.
The more they increased, the more they sinned against me.
They feed on the sin of my people,
It will be the same for the people as for the priest;
They will eat but not be satisfied.
Prostitution and wine and new wine
My people consult their wooden idols,
On the tops of the mountains they sacrifice,
I will not hold an accounting against your daughters because of their prostitution,
“Hear this, you priests,
And those falling away have sunk deep in slaughter,
I know Eʹphra·im,
Their dealings do not permit them to return to their God,
The pride of Israel has testified against him;
With their flock and their herd they went to look for Jehovah,
They have betrayed Jehovah,
Blow a horn in Gibʹe·ah, a trumpet in Raʹmah!
O Eʹphra·im, you will become an object of horror in the day of punishment.
The princes of Judah are like those moving a boundary.
Eʹphra·im is oppressed, crushed by judgment,
So I was like a moth to Eʹphra·im
When Eʹphra·im saw his sickness, and Judah his ulcer,
For I will be like a young lion to Eʹphra·im,
“Come, and let us return to Jehovah,
He will revive us after two days.
We will know, we will earnestly seek to know Jehovah.
“What should I do with you, Eʹphra·im?
That is why I will cut them down by means of the prophets;
For in loyal love I delight, not in sacrifice,
But they, like mere men, have violated the covenant.
Gilʹe·ad is a town of evildoers,
The company of priests are like marauder bands lying in ambush for a man.
I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Israel.
Furthermore, O Judah, a harvest is set for you,
“At the time when I would heal Israel,
But they do not say in their heart that I will remember all their wickedness.
They make the king rejoice by their wickedness,
All of them are adulterers,
On the day of our king, princes have become sick
For they approach with hearts burning like an oven.
All of them are hot like an oven,
Eʹphra·im mixes with the nations.
Strangers have consumed his strength, but he does not know it.
The pride of Israel has testified against him,
Eʹphra·im is like a simpleminded dove, lacking good sense.
Wherever they go, I will spread my net over them.
Woe to them, for they have fled from me!
From their heart they did not call to me for help,
“Put a horn to your mouth!
To me they cry out, ‘My God, we, Israel, know you!’
Israel has rejected what is good.
They have appointed kings, but not through me.
Your calf has been rejected, O Sa·marʹi·a.
For this is from Israel.
For it is wind that they are sowing,
Israel will be swallowed down.
For they have gone up to As·syrʹi·a, like a lone wild donkey.
Although they hire them from among the nations,
For Eʹphra·im has multiplied altars to sin.
I wrote for him the many things of my law,
They offer sacrificial gifts to me, and they eat the meat,
Israel has forgotten his Maker and has built temples,
“Do not rejoice, O Israel,
But the threshing floor and winepress will not feed them,
They will not continue dwelling in the land of Jehovah;
They will no longer pour out wine offerings to Jehovah;
What will you do in the day of meeting,
For look! they will have to flee because of destruction.
The days of reckoning will come,
The watchman of Eʹphra·im was with my God.
They have sunk deep into ruin, as in the days of Gibʹe·ah.
“Like grapes in the wilderness I found Israel.
Eʹphra·im’s glory flies away like a bird;
Even if they raise children,
Eʹphra·im, planted in a pasture, was to me like Tyre;
Give them, O Jehovah, what you should give them;
“Israel is a degenerate vine yielding its fruit.
Their heart is hypocritical;
Now they will say, ‘We have no king, for we have not feared Jehovah.
They speak empty words, make false oaths, and make covenants;
The residents of Sa·marʹi·a will fear for the calf idol of Beth-aʹven.
It will be brought to As·syrʹi·a as a gift to a great king.
Sa·marʹi·a and her king will certainly be done away with,
The high places of Beth-aʹven, the sin of Israel, will be annihilated.
From the days of Gibʹe·ah you have sinned, O Israel.
I will also discipline them when I please.
Eʹphra·im was a trained heifer that loved to thresh,
Sow seed for yourselves in righteousness and reap loyal love.
But you have plowed wickedness,
An uproar will rise against your people,
“When Israel was a boy, I loved him,
The more they called them,
But it was I who taught Eʹphra·im to walk, taking them in my arms;
With the ropes of men I kept drawing them, with the cords of love;
They will not return to the land of Egypt, but As·syrʹi·a will be their king,
And a sword will whirl against his cities
My people are bent on unfaithfulness to me.
How can I give you up, O Eʹphra·im?
I will not vent my burning anger.
They will walk after Jehovah, and he will roar like a lion;
They will tremble like a bird when they come out of Egypt,
“Eʹphra·im has surrounded me with lies,
“Eʹphra·im is feeding on wind.
Jehovah has a legal case against Judah;
In the womb he seized his brother by the heel,
He kept contending with an angel and prevailed.
Jehovah the God of armies,
“So return to your God,
But in the hand of the tradesman are deceptive scales;
Eʹphra·im keeps saying, ‘Indeed, I have become rich;
But I am Jehovah your God from the land of Egypt.
I spoke to the prophets,
With Gilʹe·ad there has been deception and untruth.
Jacob ran away to the territory of Aʹram;
By a prophet Jehovah brought Israel up from Egypt,
Eʹphra·im has caused bitter offense;
“When Eʹphra·im spoke, there was trembling;
Now they add to their sin
So they will become like the morning clouds,
But I am Jehovah your God from the land of Egypt;
I knew you in the wilderness, in the land of drought.
They were satisfied with their pastures,
I will become like a young lion to them,
I will come upon them like a bear that has lost its cubs,
It will destroy you, O Israel,
Where, then, is your king, that he may save you in all your cities,
I gave you a king in my anger,
The error of Eʹphra·im is wrapped up;
The pangs of childbirth will come for him.
From the power of the Grave I will redeem them;
“Come back, O Israel, to Jehovah your God,
Come back to Jehovah with these words,
As·syrʹi·a will not save us.
I will heal their unfaithfulness.
I will become like the dew to Israel;
His twigs will spread,
They will again dwell in his shadow.
Eʹphra·im will say, ‘What more do I have to do with idols?’
Who is wise? Let him understand these things.
The word of Jehovah that came to Joel the son of Pe·thuʹel:
“Hear this, you elders,
Tell about it to your sons,
“Blow a horn in Zion!
It is a day of darkness and gloom,
Ahead of it a fire devours,
“For look! in those days and in that time,
I will also gather together all the nations
For my people they cast lots;
The words of Aʹmos, who was among the sheep raisers from Te·koʹa, which he received in vision concerning Israel in the days of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah and in the days of Jer·o·boʹam son of Joʹash, the king of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
He said:
“This is what Jehovah says,
So I will send a fire upon the house of Hazʹa·el,
I will break the bars of Damascus;
This is what Jehovah says,
So I will send a fire onto the wall of Gazʹa,
I will destroy the inhabitants from Ashʹdod,
This is what Jehovah says,
“This is what Jehovah says,
So I will send a fire into Moʹab,
I will remove the ruler from her midst
This is what Jehovah says,
So I will send a fire into Judah,
This is what Jehovah says,
They trample the heads of the lowly into the dust of the earth,
They stretch out next to every altar on garments they seized as security for a loan;
‘But it was I who annihilated the Amʹor·ite before them,
“Hear this word that Jehovah has spoken concerning you, O people of Israel, concerning the whole family that I brought up out of the land of Egypt:
‘You alone I have known out of all the families of the earth.
Will two walk together unless they have agreed to meet?
Will a lion roar in the forest when it has no prey?
Will a bird fall into a trap on the ground when there is no snare for it?
If a horn is blown in a city, do the people not tremble?
For the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will not do a thing
The lion has roared! Who will not be afraid?
‘Proclaim it on the fortified towers of Ashʹdod
“Hear this word, you cows of Baʹshan,
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sworn by his holiness,
You will go out through the breaches in the wall, each one straight ahead;
‘Come to Bethʹel and commit transgression,
Burn a thanksgiving sacrifice of leavened bread;
‘And for my part, I made your teeth clean of food in all your cities
‘I also withheld rain from you three months before the harvest;
People of two or three cities staggered to one city to drink water,
‘I struck you with scorching heat and mildew.
“Hear this word that I am taking up against you as a dirge, O house of Israel:
‘The virgin, Israel, has fallen;
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:
“For this is what Jehovah says to the house of Israel:
Do not search for Bethʹel,
Search for Jehovah, and keep living,
You turn justice into wormwood,
The One who made the Kiʹmah constellation and the Keʹsil constellation,
He will cause destruction to burst out against the strong,
“Woe to the self-assured ones in Zion,
Cross over to Calʹneh and see.
Are you putting out of your mind the day of calamity
They lie on beds of ivory and sprawl out on couches,
They improvise songs to the sound of the harp,
They drink wine by the bowlful
So they will go into exile at the head of the exiles,
‘The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sworn by himself,’ declares Jehovah the God of armies,
“‘“And if ten men are left in one house, they will also die.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! He formed a locust swarm when the late crop was beginning to come up. This was the later crop after the king’s hay had been cut.
When the swarm finished eating up the vegetation of the land, I said: “O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, please forgive! How can Jacob survive? For he is weak!”
So Jehovah reconsidered this. “It will not happen,” Jehovah said.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah called for a punishment by fire. It consumed the vast deep waters, and it consumed a portion of the land.
Then I said: “O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, please hold this back. How can Jacob survive? For he is weak!”
So Jehovah reconsidered this. “That too will not happen,” the Sovereign Lord Jehovah said.
This is what he showed me: Look! Jehovah was standing on a wall made with a plumb line, and there was a plumb line in his hand.
Then Jehovah said to me: “What do you see, Aʹmos?” So I said: “A plumb line.” Jehovah then said: “Here I am putting a plumb line among my people Israel. I will no longer pardon them.
The high places of Isaac will be desolated, and the sanctuaries of Israel will be devastated; and I will come against the house of Jer·o·boʹam with a sword.”
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! There was a basket of summer fruit.
Then he said, “What do you see, Aʹmos?” I replied, “A basket of summer fruit.” Then Jehovah said to me: “The end has come for my people Israel. I will no longer pardon them.
‘The songs of the temple will turn into wailing in that day,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘There will be many carcasses thrown everywhere—hush!’
Hear this, you who trample on the poor
Who say, ‘When will the new moon festival be over, that we may sell our grain,
So that we may buy the needy for silver
Jehovah has sworn by the Pride of Jacob,
On this account the land will tremble,
‘In that day,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah,
I saw Jehovah stationed above the altar, and he said: “Strike the head of the pillar, and the thresholds will shake. Cut them off at the head, and I will kill the last of them with the sword. No one who flees will get away, and no one trying to escape will succeed.
If they dig down into the Grave,
And if they hide themselves on the top of Carʹmel,
If they go into captivity before their enemies,
For the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of the armies, is the One who touches the land,
‘The one who builds his stairs in the heavens
‘Are you not like the sons of the Cushʹites to me, O people of Israel?’ declares Jehovah.
‘Look! The eyes of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah are on the sinful kingdom,
‘For look! I am giving the command,
The vision of O·ba·diʹah:
The word of Jehovah came to Joʹnah the son of A·mitʹtai, saying:
“Get up, go to Ninʹe·veh the great city, and proclaim judgment against her, for their wickedness has come to my attention.”
But Joʹnah got up to run away from Jehovah to Tarʹshish; he went down to Jopʹpa and found a ship going to Tarʹshish. So he paid the fare and went aboard to go with them to Tarʹshish, away from Jehovah.
Then Jehovah hurled a strong wind at the sea, and there was such a violent storm on the sea that the ship was about to be wrecked.
Then Joʹnah prayed to Jehovah his God from the belly of the fish,
and he said:
When you threw me to the depths, into the heart of the open sea,
And I said, ‘I have been driven away from your sight!
Then the word of Jehovah came to Joʹnah a second time, saying:
“Get up, go to Ninʹe·veh the great city, and proclaim to her the message that I tell you.”
So Joʹnah got up and went to Ninʹe·veh in obedience to the word of Jehovah. Now Ninʹe·veh was a very large city—a walking distance of three days.
Then Joʹnah entered the city, and walking a day’s journey, he was proclaiming: “In just  days more, Ninʹe·veh will be overthrown.”
But this was highly displeasing to Joʹnah, and he became hot with anger.
So he prayed to Jehovah: “Ah, now, Jehovah, was this not my concern when I was in my own land? That is why I tried to flee to Tarʹshish in the first place; for I knew that you are a compassionate and merciful God, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, one who feels grieved over calamity.
Now, O Jehovah, please take away my life, for it is better for me to die than to live.”
Jehovah asked: “Is it right for you to be so angry?”
The word of Jehovah that came to Miʹcah of Moʹresh·eth, in the days of Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah, and that he received in a vision concerning Sa·marʹi·a and Jerusalem:
“Hear, all you peoples!
For look! Jehovah is going out from his place;
The mountains will melt under him,
All of this is because of the revolt of Jacob,
I will make Sa·marʹi·a a heap of ruins of the field,
All her graven images will be crushed to pieces,
“Woe to those who scheme what is harmful,
They desire fields and seize them;
Therefore this is what Jehovah says:
In that day people will recite a proverb concerning you,
So you will have no one to stretch the measuring cord,
“Stop preaching!” they preach,
Is it being said, O house of Jacob:
I said: “Hear, please, you heads of Jacob
But you hate what is good and love what is bad;
You also eat the flesh of my people
At that time they will call to Jehovah for help,
This is what Jehovah says against the prophets who are leading my people astray,
‘You will have night; there will be no vision;
The visionaries will be put to shame,
In the final part of the days,
And many nations will go and say:
He will render judgment among many peoples
They will sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree,
For all the peoples will walk, each in the name of its god,
“In that day,” declares Jehovah,
I will make the one who was limping a remnant,
“Now you are slashing yourself,
And you, O Bethʹle·hem Ephʹra·thah,
So he will give them up
He will stand up and shepherd in the strength of Jehovah,
And he will bring peace.
They will shepherd the land of As·syrʹi·a with the sword,
The remaining ones of Jacob will be in the midst of many peoples
Hear, please, what Jehovah is saying.
Hear, O mountains, the legal case of Jehovah,
“My people, what have I done to you?
For I brought you up out of the land of Egypt,
My people, remember, please, what King Baʹlak of Moʹab proposed,
With what will I come before Jehovah?
Will Jehovah be pleased with thousands of rams,
Woe to me! I am like one who,
The loyal one has perished from the earth;
Their hands are expert at doing what is bad;
Their best one is like thorns,
Do not put faith in your companion
For a son despises his father,
But as for me, I will keep on the lookout for Jehovah.
A pronouncement against Ninʹe·veh: The book of the vision of Naʹhum the Elʹkosh·ite:
Jehovah is a God who requires exclusive devotion and takes vengeance;
Jehovah is slow to anger and great in power,
One who scatters has come up against you.
For Jehovah will restore the pride of Jacob,
The shields of his mighty men are dyed red,
Woe to the city of bloodshed!
There is the crack of the whip and the rattle of wheels,
The mounted horseman, the flashing sword, and the glittering spear,
A pronouncement that Ha·bakʹkuk the prophet received in a vision:
How long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help, but you do not hear?
Why do you make me witness wrongdoing?
At my guardpost I will keep standing,
Jehovah then answered me:
For the vision is yet for its appointed time,
The prayer of Ha·bakʹkuk the prophet, in dirges:
O Jehovah, I have heard the report about you.
God came from Teʹman,
The word of Jehovah that came to Zeph·a·niʹah son of Cushʹi son of Ged·a·liʹah son of Am·a·riʹah son of Hez·e·kiʹah in the days of Jo·siʹah son of Aʹmon the king of Judah:
“I will completely sweep away everything from the surface of the ground,” declares Jehovah.
“I will sweep away man and beast.
Gather together, yes, gather yourselves,
Before the decree takes effect,
Seek Jehovah, all you meek ones of the earth,
Woe to the rebellious, the polluted, the oppressive city!
She has obeyed no voice; she has accepted no discipline.
Her princes within her are roaring lions.
In the second year of King Da·riʹus, in the sixth month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came through Hagʹgai the prophet to Ze·rubʹba·bel son of She·alʹti·el, the governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘These people say, “The time has not yet come for the house of Jehovah to be built.”’”
In the seventh month, on the st day of the month, the word of Jehovah came through Hagʹgai the prophet, saying,
“Please ask Ze·rubʹba·bel son of She·alʹti·el, the governor of Judah, and Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, and the rest of the people:
In the eighth month in the second year of Da·riʹus, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Zech·a·riʹah son of Ber·e·chiʹah son of Idʹdo, saying:
“Jehovah grew greatly indignant at your fathers.
“Say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “‘Return to me,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘and I will return to you,’ says Jehovah of armies.”’
“‘Do not become like your fathers, to whom the former prophets proclaimed: “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Turn away, please, from your evil ways and your evil deeds.’”’
“‘Where are your fathers now? And did the prophets live forever?
However, my words and my decrees that I commanded my servants, the prophets, caught up with your fathers, did they not?’ So they returned to me and said: ‘Jehovah of armies has dealt with us according to our ways and our deeds, just as he had determined to do.’”
On the th day of the th month, that is, the month of Sheʹbat, in the second year of Da·riʹus, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Zech·a·riʹah son of Ber·e·chiʹah son of Idʹdo, saying:
“I saw a vision in the night. There was a man riding on a red horse, and he stood still among the myrtle trees in the ravine; and behind him there were red, reddish-brown, and white horses.”
So I said: “Who are these, my lord?”
Then the man who was standing still among the myrtle trees said: “These are the ones whom Jehovah has sent out to walk about in the earth.”
And they said to the angel of Jehovah who was standing among the myrtle trees: “We have walked about in the earth, and look! the whole earth is quiet and undisturbed.”
So the angel of Jehovah said: “O Jehovah of armies, how long will you withhold your mercy from Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, with whom you have been indignant these  years?”
Jehovah answered the angel who was speaking with me, with kind and comforting words.
Then the angel who was speaking with me told me: “Call out, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I am zealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great zeal.
And I looked up and saw a man with a measuring line in his hand.
So I asked: “Where are you going?”
And look! the angel who was speaking with me went out, and another angel came to meet him.
Then he said to him: “Run over there and tell that young man, ‘“Jerusalem will be inhabited as open rural country, because of all the men and livestock within her.
And I will become to her,” declares Jehovah, “a wall of fire all around, and I will become the glory in her midst.”’”
“Come! Come! Flee from the land of the north,” declares Jehovah.
“Come, Zion! Make your escape, you who are dwelling with the daughter of Babylon.
For this is what Jehovah of armies says, who after being glorified has sent me to the nations that were plundering you: ‘Whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye.
For now I will wave my hand against them, and they will become plunder for their own slaves.’ And you will certainly know that Jehovah of armies has sent me.
“Shout for joy, O daughter of Zion; for I am coming, and I will reside in your midst,” declares Jehovah.
“Many nations will join themselves to Jehovah in that day, and they will become my people; and I will reside in your midst.” And you will have to know that Jehovah of armies has sent me to you.
Jehovah will take possession of Judah as his portion on the holy ground, and he will again choose Jerusalem.
Be silent, all flesh, before Jehovah, for he is taking action from his holy dwelling.
And he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of Jehovah, and Satan was standing at his right hand to resist him.
Then the angel of Jehovah said to Satan: “May Jehovah rebuke you, O Satan, yes, may Jehovah, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Is not this one a burning log snatched out of the fire?”
Now Joshua was clothed in filthy garments and standing before the angel.
The angel said to those standing before him, “Remove his filthy garments.” Then he said to him, “See, I have caused your error to pass away from you, and you will be clothed with fine garments.”
So I said: “Let a clean turban be put on his head.” And they put the clean turban on his head and clothed him with garments; and the angel of Jehovah was standing nearby.
The angel of Jehovah then declared to Joshua:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘If you will walk in my ways and carry out your responsibilities before me, then you will serve as a judge in my house and take care of my courtyards; and I will give you free access among these who are standing here.’
“‘Hear, please, O High Priest Joshua, you and your companions who sit before you, for these men serve as a sign; look! I am bringing in my servant Sprout!
See the stone that I have set before Joshua! On the one stone are seven eyes; and I am engraving an inscription on it,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘and I will take away the guilt of that land in one day.’
“‘In that day,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘each of you will invite your neighbor to come under your vine and under your fig tree.’”
The angel who had been speaking with me came back and woke me up, as when waking someone from sleep.
Then he said to me: “What do you see?”
And next to it are two olive trees, one on the right of the bowl and one on the left.”
Then I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “What do these things mean, my lord?”
So the angel who was speaking with me asked: “Do you not know what these things mean?”
He then said to me: “This is the word of Jehovah to Ze·rubʹba·bel: ‘“Not by a military force, nor by power, but by my spirit,” says Jehovah of armies.
Who are you, O great mountain? Before Ze·rubʹba·bel you will become a level land. And he will bring out the top stone amid shouts of: “How wonderful! How wonderful!”’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“The hands of Ze·rubʹba·bel have laid the foundation of this house, and his own hands will finish it. And you will have to know that Jehovah of armies has sent me to you.
For who has despised the day of small beginnings? For they will rejoice and see the plumb line in the hand of Ze·rubʹba·bel. These seven are the eyes of Jehovah, which are roving about in all the earth.”
Then I asked him: “What is the meaning of these two olive trees on the right and on the left of the lampstand?”
I asked him a second time: “What is the meaning of the two bunches of twigs of the olive trees that are pouring out the golden liquid through the two golden tubes?”
So he asked me: “Do you not know what these things mean?”
He said: “These are the two anointed ones who are standing alongside the Lord of the whole earth.”
Again I looked up, and I saw a flying scroll.
He asked me: “What do you see?”
Then he said to me: “This is the curse that is going out over the face of all the earth, because everyone who steals, as written on its one side, has gone unpunished; and everyone who makes a sworn oath, as written on its other side, has gone unpunished.
‘I have sent it out,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘and it will enter into the house of the thief and into the house of the one who makes a false oath in my name; and it will remain inside that house and consume it and its timbers and its stones.’”
Then the angel who was speaking with me came forward and said to me: “Look up, please, and see what is going out.”
So I asked: “What is it?”
And I saw that the round lid of lead was lifted up, and there was a woman sitting inside the container.
So he said: “This is Wickedness.” Then he threw her back into the eʹphah container, after which he thrust the lead weight over its mouth.
Then I looked up and saw two women coming forward, and they were soaring in the wind. They had wings like the wings of a stork. And they lifted up the container between the earth and heaven.
So I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “Where are they taking the eʹphah container?”
He replied: “To the land of Shiʹnar to build her a house; and when it is prepared, she will be deposited there in her proper place.”
Then I looked up again and saw four chariots coming from between two mountains, and the mountains were of copper.
The first chariot had red horses, and the second chariot, black horses.
The third chariot had white horses, and the fourth chariot, speckled and dappled horses.
I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “What are these, my lord?”
The angel answered me: “These are the four spirits of the heavens that are going out after having taken their station before the Lord of the whole earth.
The one with the black horses is going out to the land of the north; the white ones are going out beyond the sea; and the speckled ones are going out to the land of the south.
And the dappled ones were eager to go out to walk about through the earth.” Then he said: “Go, walk about through the earth.” And they began walking about through the earth.
He then called out to me and said: “See, those going out to the land of the north have caused the spirit of Jehovah to rest in the land of the north.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Take from Helʹdai, To·biʹjah, and Je·daʹiah what they brought from the people in exile; and on that day, you must go to the house of Jo·siʹah the son of Zeph·a·niʹah along with these who have come from Babylon.
You should take silver and gold and make a crown and put it on the head of Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest.
And say to him,
He is the one who will build the temple of Jehovah, and he is the one who will assume the majesty. He will sit down on his throne and rule, and he will also be a priest on his throne, and there will be a peaceable agreement between the two.
And the crown will serve as a memorial for Heʹlem, To·biʹjah, Je·daʹiah, and Hen the son of Zeph·a·niʹah, in the temple of Jehovah.
And in the fourth year of King Da·riʹus, the word of Jehovah came to Zech·a·riʹah on the fourth day of the ninth month, that is, the month of Chisʹlev.
The people of Bethʹel sent Shar·eʹzer and Reʹgem-melʹech and his men to beg for the favor of Jehovah,
saying to the priests of the house of Jehovah of armies and to the prophets: “Should I weep in the fifth month and abstain from food, as I have done for so many years?”
The word of Jehovah of armies again came to me, saying:
“Say to all the people of the land and to the priests, ‘When you fasted and wailed in the fifth month and in the seventh month for  years, did you really fast for me?
And when you would eat and drink, were you not eating for yourselves and drinking for yourselves?
Should you not obey the words that Jehovah proclaimed through the former prophets, while Jerusalem and her surrounding cities were inhabited and at peace, and while the Negʹeb and the She·pheʹlah were inhabited?’”
The word of Jehovah again came to Zech·a·riʹah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Judge with true justice, and deal with one another in loyal love and mercy.
Do not defraud the widow or the fatherless child, the foreigner or the poor; and do not scheme evil against one another in your hearts.’
But they kept refusing to pay attention, and they stubbornly turned their backs, and they stopped up their ears so as not to hear.
They made their heart like a diamond and would not obey the law and the words that Jehovah of armies sent by his spirit through the former prophets. So there came great indignation from Jehovah of armies.”
“‘Just as they did not listen when I called, so I would not listen when they called,’ says Jehovah of armies.
‘And I scattered them with a storm wind throughout all the nations that they had not known, and the land was left desolate behind them, with no one passing through or returning; for they turned the desirable land into an object of horror.’”
The word of Jehovah of armies again came, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘I will be zealous for Zion with a great zeal, and with great wrath I will be zealous for her.’”
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘I will return to Zion and reside in Jerusalem; and Jerusalem will be called the city of truth, and the mountain of Jehovah of armies, the holy mountain.’”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Old men and women will again sit in the public squares of Jerusalem, each with his staff in his hand because of his great age.
And the public squares of the city will be filled with boys and girls playing there.’”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Although it may seem too difficult to the remaining ones of this people in those days, should it seem too difficult also to me?’ declares Jehovah of armies.”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Here I am saving my people from the lands of the east and the west.
And I will bring them in, and they will reside in Jerusalem; and they will become my people, and I will become their God in truth and in righteousness.’”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Let your hands be strong, you who now hear these words from the mouth of the prophets, the same words that were spoken on the day the foundation of the house of Jehovah of armies was laid for the temple to be built.
For before that time, there were no wages being paid either for man or for beast; and it was not safe to come and go because of the adversary, for I turned all men one against another.’
“‘But now I will not deal with the remaining ones of this people as in the former days,’ declares Jehovah of armies.
‘For the seed of peace will be sown; the vine will produce its fruit and the earth its yield, and the heavens will give their dew; and I will cause the remaining ones of this people to inherit all these things.
And just as you became an object of cursing among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so I will save you, and you will become a blessing. Do not be afraid! Let your hands be strong.’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘“Just as I had determined to bring calamity on you because your forefathers made me indignant,” says Jehovah of armies, “and I felt no regret,
A pronouncement:
And against Haʹmath, which borders on her,
Tyre built herself a rampart.
Look! Jehovah will take away her possessions,
Ashʹke·lon will see it and be afraid;
An illegitimate son will settle in Ashʹdod,
I will remove the bloodstained things from his mouth
I will encamp as a guard for my house,
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion.
I will take away the war chariot from Eʹphra·im
As for you, O woman, by the blood of your covenant,
Return to the stronghold, you prisoners with hope.
For I will bend Judah as my bow.
Jehovah will be seen over them,
“Ask Jehovah for rain in the time of the spring rain.
For the teraphim statues have spoken deception;
Against the shepherds my anger burns,
From him comes the keyman,
And they will become like warriors,
I will make the house of Judah superior,
Those of Eʹphra·im must become like a mighty warrior,
‘I will whistle for them and gather them together;
Though I scatter them like seed among the peoples,
I will bring them back from the land of Egypt
He must pass through the sea with distress;
I will make them superior in Jehovah,
“Open your doors, O Lebʹa·non,
Wail, you juniper, for the cedar has fallen;
Listen! The wailing of shepherds,
“This is what Jehovah my God says, ‘Shepherd the flock meant for the slaughter,
whose buyers slaughter them and are not held guilty. And those who sell them say, “May Jehovah be praised, for I will become rich.” And their shepherds have no compassion for them.’
“‘For I will no longer show compassion on the inhabitants of the land,’ declares Jehovah. ‘So I will cause each man to fall into the hand of his neighbor and his king; and they will crush the land, and I will not rescue them out of their hand.’”
And I began to shepherd the flock meant for slaughter, in your behalf, O afflicted ones of the flock. So I took two staffs, and I called one Pleasantness, and the other Union, and I began to shepherd the flock.
And I dismissed three shepherds in one month, for I became impatient with them, and they detested me as well.
And I said: “I will not keep shepherding you. Let the one who is dying die, and let the one perishing perish. As for those who are left, let them devour one another’s flesh.”
So I took my staff Pleasantness and cut it up, breaking my covenant that I had made with all the peoples.
So it was broken in that day, and the afflicted ones of the flock who were watching me knew that it was the word of Jehovah.
Then I said to them: “If it seems good to you, give me my wages; but if not, withhold them.” And they paid my wages,  pieces of silver.
Then Jehovah said to me: “Throw it into the treasury—the magnificent value with which they valued me.” So I took the  pieces of silver and threw it into the treasury at the house of Jehovah.
Then I cut up my second staff, the Union, breaking the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
A pronouncement:
“Here I am making Jerusalem a cup that causes all the surrounding peoples to stagger; and there will be a siege against Judah as well as against Jerusalem.
In that day I will make Jerusalem a heavy stone to all the peoples. All those who lift it are sure to be severely injured; and all the nations of the earth will be gathered against her.
In that day,” declares Jehovah, “I will strike every horse with panic and its rider with madness. I will keep my eyes on the house of Judah, but I will strike every horse of the peoples with blindness.
And the sheikhs of Judah will say in their heart, ‘The inhabitants of Jerusalem are a strength to me by means of Jehovah of armies their God.’
In that day I will make the sheikhs of Judah like a fiery pot among wood and like a fiery torch in a row of cut grain, and they will consume all the surrounding peoples on the right and on the left; and Jerusalem will again be inhabited in her place, in Jerusalem.
“And Jehovah will save the tents of Judah first, so that the beauty of the house of David and the beauty of the inhabitants of Jerusalem may not be too great over Judah.
In that day Jehovah will be a defense around the inhabitants of Jerusalem; in that day the one who stumbles among them will be like David, and the house of David like God, like Jehovah’s angel who goes before them.
And in that day I will be certain to annihilate all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
“I will pour out on the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of favor and supplication, and they will look to the one whom they pierced, and they will wail over him as they would wail over an only son; and they will grieve bitterly over him as they would grieve over a firstborn son.
In that day the wailing in Jerusalem will be great, like the wailing at Ha·dad·rimʹmon in the Plain of Me·gidʹdo.
And the land will wail, each family by itself; the family of David’s house by itself, and their women by themselves; the family of Nathan’s house by itself, and their women by themselves;
the family of Leʹvi’s house by itself, and their women by themselves; the family of the Shimʹe·ites by itself, and their women by themselves;
and all the families that are left remaining, each family by itself, and their women by themselves.
“In that day a well will be opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for cleansing sin and impurity.
“In that day,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will erase the names of the idols from the land, and they will no longer be remembered; and I will rid the land of the prophets and the spirit of uncleanness.
And if a man should prophesy again, his father and his mother who caused his birth will say to him, ‘You will not live, because you have spoken lies in the name of Jehovah.’ And his father and his mother who caused his birth will pierce him through because of his prophesying.
“In that day each of the prophets will be ashamed of his vision when he prophesies; and they will not wear an official garment of hair in order to deceive.
And he will say, ‘I am no prophet. I am a man cultivating the soil, because a man bought me when I was young.’
And if someone asks him, ‘What are these wounds between your shoulders?’ he will answer, ‘Wounds I received in the house of my friends.’”
“O sword, awake against my shepherd,
“And in all the land,” declares Jehovah,
And I will bring the third part through the fire;
“Look! The day is coming, a day belonging to Jehovah, when the spoil from you will be divided in your midst.
I will gather all the nations against Jerusalem for the war; and the city will be captured and the houses plundered and the women raped. And half of the city will go into exile, but the remaining ones of the people will not be cut off from the city.
“Jehovah will go out and war against those nations as when he fights in the day of a battle.
In that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives, which faces Jerusalem on the east; and the Mount of Olives will be split in half, from east to west, forming a very great valley; and half of the mountain will move to the north, and half of it to the south.
You will flee to the valley of my mountains, for the valley of the mountains will extend all the way to Aʹzel. You will have to flee, just as you fled because of the earthquake in the days of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah. And Jehovah my God will come, and all the holy ones will be with him.
“In that day there will be no precious light—things will be congealed.
And it will become one day that is known as belonging to Jehovah. It will not be day, nor will it be night; and at evening time there will be light.
In that day living waters will flow out from Jerusalem, half of them toward the eastern sea and half of them toward the western sea. It will happen in summer and in winter.
And Jehovah will be King over all the earth. In that day Jehovah will be one, and his name one.
“The whole land will become like the Arʹa·bah, from Geʹba to Rimʹmon south of Jerusalem; and she will rise and be inhabited in her place, from the Gate of Benjamin all the way to the site of the First Gate, all the way to the Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Ha·nanʹel all the way to the winepresses of the king.
And people will inhabit her; and there will never again be a curse of destruction, and Jerusalem will be inhabited in security.
“And this is the scourge with which Jehovah will scourge all the peoples who wage war against Jerusalem: Their flesh will rot away while they stand on their feet, their eyes will rot away in their sockets, and their tongues will rot away in their mouths.
“In that day confusion from Jehovah will be widespread among them; and each one will grab hold of the hand of his companion, and his hand will come against the hand of his companion.
Judah will also be involved in the war at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the surrounding nations will be gathered, gold and silver and garments in vast quantity.
A pronouncement:
“I have shown love to you people,” says Jehovah.
and Eʹsau I hated; and I made his mountains desolate and left his inheritance for the jackals of the wilderness.”
“Though Eʹdom says, ‘We have been shattered, but we will return and rebuild the ruins,’ this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘They will build, but I will tear down, and they will be called “the territory of wickedness” and “the people whom Jehovah has forever condemned.”
“And now, O priests, this commandment is for you.
If you refuse to listen and to take it to heart to glorify my name,” says Jehovah of armies, “I will send on you the curse, and I will turn your blessings into curses. Yes, I have turned the blessings into curses, because you are not taking it to heart.”
“Look! I will ruin your sown seed because of you, and I will scatter dung on your faces, the dung of your festivals; and you will be carried away to it.
Then you will know that I have given this commandment to you so that my covenant with Leʹvi may continue,” says Jehovah of armies.
“Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight. Look! He will certainly come,” says Jehovah of armies.
“But who will endure the day of his coming, and who will be able to stand when he appears? For he will be like the fire of a refiner and like the lye of laundrymen.
And he will sit as a refiner and cleanser of silver and will cleanse the sons of Leʹvi; and he will clarify them like gold and like silver, and they will certainly become to Jehovah people presenting a gift offering in righteousness.
And the gift offering of Judah and of Jerusalem will actually be pleasing to Jehovah, as in the days of long ago and as in the years of antiquity.
“For look! the day is coming, burning like a furnace, when all the presumptuous ones and all those practicing wickedness will become like stubble. The coming day will certainly devour them,” says Jehovah of armies, “and it will leave them neither root nor branch.
But on you who honor my name, the sun of righteousness will shine, with healing in its rays; and you will skip about like fattened calves.”
“And you will tread the wicked underfoot, for they will be like dust under the soles of your feet on the day when I take action,” says Jehovah of armies.
“Remember the Law of my servant Moses, the regulations and judgments that I commanded at Horʹeb for all Israel to obey.
The book of the history of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham:
Abraham became father to Isaac;
Judah became father to Peʹrez and Zeʹrah by Taʹmar;
Ram became father to Am·minʹa·dab;
Salʹmon became father to Boʹaz by Raʹhab;
Jesʹse became father to David the king.
Solʹo·mon became father to Re·ho·boʹam;
Aʹsa became father to Je·hoshʹa·phat;
Uz·ziʹah became father to Joʹtham;
Hez·e·kiʹah became father to Ma·nasʹseh;
Jo·siʹah became father to Jec·o·niʹah and to his brothers at the time of the deportation to Babylon.
After the deportation to Babylon, Jec·o·niʹah became father to She·alʹti·el;
Ze·rubʹba·bel became father to A·biʹud;
Aʹzor became father to Zaʹdok;
E·liʹud became father to El·e·aʹzar;
Jacob became father to Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom Jesus was born, who is called Christ.
All the generations, then, from Abraham until David were  generations; from David until the deportation to Babylon,  generations; from the deportation to Babylon until the Christ,  generations.
But this is how the birth of Jesus Christ took place. During the time his mother Mary was promised in marriage to Joseph, she was found to be pregnant by holy spirit before they were united.
However, because her husband Joseph was righteous and did not want to make her a public spectacle, he intended to divorce her secretly.
But after he had thought these things over, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared to him in a dream, saying: “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take your wife Mary home, for what has been conceived in her is by holy spirit.
She will give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.”
All of this actually came about to fulfill what was spoken by Jehovah through his prophet, saying:
“Look! The virgin will become pregnant and will give birth to a son, and they will name him Im·manʹu·el,” which means, when translated, “With Us Is God.”
Then Joseph woke up from his sleep and did as the angel of Jehovah had directed him, and he took his wife home.
But he did not have sexual relations with her until she gave birth to a son, and he named him Jesus.
After Jesus had been born in Bethʹle·hem of Ju·deʹa in the days of Herod the king, look! astrologers from the East came to Jerusalem,
saying: “Where is the one born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when we were in the East, and we have come to do obeisance to him.”
At hearing this, King Herod was agitated, and all Jerusalem with him.
On gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
They said to him: “In Bethʹle·hem of Ju·deʹa, for this is how it has been written through the prophet:
‘And you, O Bethʹle·hem of the land of Judah, are by no means the most insignificant city among the governors of Judah, for out of you will come a governing one, who will shepherd my people Israel.’”
Then Herod secretly summoned the astrologers and carefully ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearing.
When sending them to Bethʹle·hem, he said: “Go make a careful search for the young child, and when you have found him, report back to me so that I too may go and do obeisance to him.”
After they had heard the king, they went their way, and look! the star they had seen when they were in the East went ahead of them until it came to a stop above where the young child was.
On seeing the star, they rejoiced with great joy.
And when they went into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and falling down, they did obeisance to him. They also opened their treasures and presented him with gifts—gold and frankincense and myrrh.
However, because they were given divine warning in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed for their country by another way.
After they had departed, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I give you word, for Herod is about to search for the young child to kill him.”
So Joseph got up and by night took along the young child and the child’s mother and went into Egypt.
He stayed there until the death of Herod. This fulfilled what was spoken by Jehovah through his prophet, saying: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
Then Herod, seeing that he had been outwitted by the astrologers, flew into a great rage, and he sent out and had all the boys in Bethʹle·hem and in all its districts killed, from two years of age and under, according to the time that he had carefully ascertained from the astrologers.
Then was fulfilled what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, who said:
“A voice was heard in Raʹmah, weeping and much wailing. It was Rachel weeping for her children, and she was unwilling to take comfort, because they are no more.”
When Herod had died, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt
and said: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and go into the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the life of the young child are dead.”
So he got up and took the young child and the child’s mother and entered into the land of Israel.
But hearing that Ar·che·laʹus ruled Ju·deʹa instead of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Moreover, being given divine warning in a dream, he withdrew into the territory of Galʹi·lee.
And he came and settled in a city named Nazʹa·reth, in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophets: “He will be called a Naz·a·reneʹ.”
In those days John the Baptist came preaching in the wilderness of Ju·deʹa,
saying: “Repent, for the Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
This, in fact, is the one spoken of through Isaiah the prophet in these words: “A voice of one calling out in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah! Make his roads straight.’”
Now John was clothed with camel’s hair and had a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
Then the people of Jerusalem and all Ju·deʹa and all the country around the Jordan were going out to him,
and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, openly confessing their sins.
When he caught sight of many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to the baptism, he said to them: “You offspring of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Therefore, produce fruit that befits repentance.
Do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones.
The ax is already lying at the root of the trees. Every tree, then, that does not produce fine fruit is to be cut down and thrown into the fire.
I, for my part, baptize you with water because of your repentance, but the one coming after me is stronger than I am, whose sandals I am not worthy to take off. That one will baptize you with holy spirit and with fire.
His winnowing shovel is in his hand, and he will clean up his threshing floor completely and will gather his wheat into the storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.”
Then Jesus came from Galʹi·lee to the Jordan to John, in order to be baptized by him.
But the latter tried to prevent him, saying: “I am the one who needs to be baptized by you, and are you coming to me?”
Jesus replied to him: “Let it be this time, for in that way it is suitable for us to carry out all that is righteous.” Then he quit preventing him.
After being baptized, Jesus immediately came up from the water; and look! the heavens were opened up, and he saw God’s spirit descending like a dove and coming upon him.
Look! Also, a voice from the heavens said: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.”
Then Jesus was led by the spirit up into the wilderness to be tempted by the Devil.
After he had fasted for  days and  nights, he felt hungry.
And the Tempter approached and said to him: “If you are a son of God, tell these stones to become loaves of bread.”
But he answered: “It is written: ‘Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every word that comes from Jehovah’s mouth.’”
Then the Devil took him along into the holy city, and he stationed him on the battlement of the temple
and said to him: “If you are a son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written: ‘He will give his angels a command concerning you,’ and, ‘They will carry you on their hands, so that you may not strike your foot against a stone.’”
Jesus said to him: “Again it is written: ‘You must not put Jehovah your God to the test.’”
Again the Devil took him along to an unusually high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.
And he said to him: “All these things I will give you if you fall down and do an act of worship to me.”
Then Jesus said to him: “Go away, Satan! For it is written: ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’”
Then the Devil left him, and look! angels came and began to minister to him.
Now when he heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew into Galʹi·lee.
Further, after leaving Nazʹa·reth, he came and took up residence in Ca·perʹna·um beside the sea in the districts of Zebʹu·lun and Naphʹta·li,
so as to fulfill what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, who said:
“O land of Zebʹu·lun and land of Naphʹta·li, along the road of the sea, on the other side of the Jordan, Galʹi·lee of the nations!
The people sitting in darkness saw a great light, and as for those sitting in a region of deathly shadow, light rose on them.”
From that time on, Jesus began preaching and saying: “Repent, for the Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
Walking alongside the Sea of Galʹi·lee, he saw two brothers, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
And he said to them: “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
At once they abandoned their nets and followed him.
Going on from there, he saw two others who were brothers, James the son of Zebʹe·dee and his brother John. They were in the boat with Zebʹe·dee their father, mending their nets, and he called them.
At once they left the boat and their father and followed him.
Then he went throughout the whole of Galʹi·lee, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the Kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity among the people.
And the report about him spread throughout all Syria, and they brought him all those who were suffering with various diseases and torments, those who were demon-possessed and epileptic and paralyzed, and he cured them.
Consequently, large crowds followed him from Galʹi·lee and De·capʹo·lis and Jerusalem and Ju·deʹa and from the other side of the Jordan.
When he saw the crowds, he went up on the mountain; and after he sat down, his disciples came to him.
Then he opened his mouth and began teaching them, saying:
“Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
“Happy are those who mourn, since they will be comforted.
“Happy are the mild-tempered, since they will inherit the earth.
“Happy are those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, since they will be filled.
“Happy are the merciful, since they will be shown mercy.
“Happy are the pure in heart, since they will see God.
“Happy are the peacemakers, since they will be called sons of God.
“Happy are those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
“Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing against you for my sake.
Rejoice and be overjoyed, since your reward is great in the heavens, for in that way they persecuted the prophets prior to you.
“You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt loses its strength, how will its saltiness be restored? It is no longer usable for anything except to be thrown outside to be trampled on by men.
“You are the light of the world. A city cannot be hid when located on a mountain.
People light a lamp and set it, not under a basket, but on the lampstand, and it shines on all those in the house.
Likewise, let your light shine before men, so that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.
“Do not think I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I came, not to destroy, but to fulfill.
Truly I say to you that sooner would heaven and earth pass away than for one smallest letter or one stroke of a letter to pass away from the Law until all things take place.
Whoever, therefore, breaks one of these least commandments and teaches others to do so will be called least in relation to the Kingdom of the heavens. But whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in relation to the Kingdom of the heavens.
For I say to you that if your righteousness does not surpass that of the scribes and the Pharisees, you will by no means enter into the Kingdom of the heavens.
“You heard that it was said to those of ancient times: ‘You must not murder, but whoever commits a murder will be accountable to the court of justice.’
However, I say to you that everyone who continues wrathful with his brother will be accountable to the court of justice; and whoever addresses his brother with an unspeakable word of contempt will be accountable to the Supreme Court; whereas whoever says, ‘You despicable fool!’ will be liable to the fiery Ge·henʹna.
“If, then, you are bringing your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you,
leave your gift there in front of the altar, and go away. First make your peace with your brother, and then come back and offer your gift.
“Be quick to settle matters with your legal opponent, while you are with him on the way there, so that somehow the opponent may not turn you over to the judge, and the judge to the court attendant, and you get thrown into prison.
I say to you for a fact, you will certainly not come out of there until you have paid over your last small coin.
“You heard that it was said: ‘You must not commit adultery.’
But I say to you that everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
“Take care not to practice your righteousness in front of men to be noticed by them; otherwise you will have no reward with your Father who is in the heavens.
So when you make gifts of mercy, do not blow a trumpet ahead of you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they may be glorified by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
But you, when making gifts of mercy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
so that your gifts of mercy may be in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
“Also, when you pray, do not act like the hypocrites, for they like to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the main streets to be seen by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
But when you pray, go into your private room and, after shutting your door, pray to your Father who is in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
When praying, do not say the same things over and over again as the people of the nations do, for they imagine they will get a hearing for their use of many words.
So do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need even before you ask him.
“You must pray, then, this way:
Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.
Give us today our bread for this day;
and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
And do not bring us into temptation, but deliver us from the wicked one.’
“For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you;
whereas if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
“When you fast, stop becoming sad-faced like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces so they may appear to men to be fasting. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
But you, when fasting, put oil on your head and wash your face,
so that you may not appear to be fasting to men but only to your Father who is in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
“Stop storing up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth and rust consume and where thieves break in and steal.
Rather, store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumes, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
“The lamp of the body is the eye. If, then, your eye is focused, your whole body will be bright.
But if your eye is envious, your whole body will be dark. If the light that is in you is really darkness, how great that darkness is!
“No one can slave for two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot slave for God and for Riches.
“On this account I say to you: Stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear. Does not life mean more than food and the body than clothing?
Observe intently the birds of heaven; they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are?
Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span?
Also, why are you anxious about clothing? Take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they grow; they do not toil, nor do they spin;
“Stop judging that you may not be judged;
for with the judgment you are judging, you will be judged, and with the measure that you are measuring out, they will measure out to you.
Why, then, do you look at the straw in your brother’s eye but do not notice the rafter in your own eye?
Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Allow me to remove the straw from your eye,’ when look! a rafter is in your own eye?
Hypocrite! First remove the rafter from your own eye, and then you will see clearly how to remove the straw from your brother’s eye.
“Do not give what is holy to dogs nor throw your pearls before swine, so that they may never trample them under their feet and turn around and rip you open.
“Keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you;
for everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking, it will be opened.
Indeed, which one of you, if his son asks for bread, will hand him a stone?
Or if he asks for a fish, he will not hand him a serpent, will he?
Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will your Father who is in the heavens give good things to those asking him!
“All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them. This, in fact, is what the Law and the Prophets mean.
“Go in through the narrow gate, because broad is the gate and spacious is the road leading off into destruction, and many are going in through it;
whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are finding it.
“Be on the watch for the false prophets who come to you in sheep’s covering, but inside they are ravenous wolves.
By their fruits you will recognize them. Never do people gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles, do they?
Likewise, every good tree produces fine fruit, but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit.
A good tree cannot bear worthless fruit, nor can a rotten tree produce fine fruit.
Every tree not producing fine fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
Really, then, by their fruits you will recognize those men.
“Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the Kingdom of the heavens, but only the one doing the will of my Father who is in the heavens will.
Many will say to me in that day: ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and expel demons in your name, and perform many powerful works in your name?’
And then I will declare to them: ‘I never knew you! Get away from me, you workers of lawlessness!’
“Therefore, everyone who hears these sayings of mine and does them will be like a discreet man who built his house on the rock.
And the rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and lashed against that house, but it did not cave in, for it had been founded on the rock.
Furthermore, everyone hearing these sayings of mine and not doing them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand.
And the rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and struck against that house, and it caved in, and its collapse was great.”
When Jesus finished these sayings, the effect was that the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching,
After he came down from the mountain, large crowds followed him.
And look! a leper came up and did obeisance to him, saying: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
So stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to! Be made clean.” Immediately his leprosy was cleansed away.
Then Jesus said to him: “See that you tell no one, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses appointed, for a witness to them.”
When he entered Ca·perʹna·um, an army officer came to him, pleading with him
and saying: “Sir, my servant is laid up in the house with paralysis, and he is suffering terribly.”
He said to him: “When I get there, I will cure him.”
The army officer replied: “Sir, I am not worthy to have you come under my roof, but just say the word and my servant will be healed.
For I too am a man under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”
When Jesus heard that, he was amazed and said to those following him: “I tell you the truth, with no one in Israel have I found so great a faith.
But I tell you that many from east and west will come and recline at the table with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of the heavens;
whereas the sons of the Kingdom will be thrown into the darkness outside. There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be.”
Then Jesus said to the army officer: “Go. Just as you have shown faith, so let it come to pass for you.” And the servant was healed in that hour.
And Jesus, on coming into Peter’s house, saw his mother-in-law lying down and sick with fever.
So he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she got up and began ministering to him.
But after it became evening, people brought him many demon-possessed ones; and he expelled the spirits with a word, and he cured all who were suffering,
in order to fulfill what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet: “He himself took our sicknesses and carried our diseases.”
When Jesus saw a crowd around him, he gave the command to depart for the other side.
And a scribe came up and said to him: “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.”
But Jesus said to him: “Foxes have dens and birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of man has nowhere to lay down his head.”
Then another of the disciples said to him: “Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father.”
Jesus said to him: “Keep following me, and let the dead bury their dead.”
And when he went aboard a boat, his disciples followed him.
Now look! a great storm arose on the sea, so that the boat was being covered by the waves; but he was sleeping.
And they came and woke him up, saying: “Lord, save us, we are about to perish!”
But he said to them: “Why are you so afraid, you with little faith?” Then he got up and rebuked the winds and the sea, and a great calm set in.
So the men were amazed and said: “What sort of person is this? Even the winds and the sea obey him.”
When he came to the other side into the region of the Gad·a·renesʹ, two demon-possessed men coming out from among the tombs met him. They were unusually fierce, so nobody had the courage to pass by on that road.
So boarding the boat, he traveled across and went into his own city.
And look! they were bringing him a paralyzed man lying on a stretcher. On seeing their faith, Jesus said to the paralytic: “Take courage, child! Your sins are forgiven.”
Now certain scribes said to themselves: “This fellow is blaspheming.”
Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said: “Why are you thinking wicked things in your hearts?
For instance, which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
However, in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” then he said to the paralytic: “Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
And he got up and went to his home.
When the crowds saw this, they were struck with fear, and they glorified God, who gave such authority to men.
Next, while moving on from there, Jesus caught sight of a man named Matthew sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.” At that he rose up and followed him.
Later as he was dining in the house, look! many tax collectors and sinners came and began dining with Jesus and his disciples.
But on seeing this, the Pharisees said to his disciples: “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
Hearing them, he said: “Healthy people do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.
Go, then, and learn what this means: ‘I want mercy, and not sacrifice.’ For I came to call, not righteous people, but sinners.”
Then John’s disciples came to him and asked: “Why do we and the Pharisees practice fasting but your disciples do not fast?”
At this Jesus said to them: “The friends of the bridegroom have no reason to mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them, do they? But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast.
Nobody sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old outer garment, for the new piece pulls away from the garment and the tear becomes worse.
Nor do people put new wine into old wineskins. If they do, then the wineskins burst and the wine spills out and the wineskins are ruined. But people put new wine into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”
While he was telling them these things, look! a certain ruler who had approached did obeisance to him, saying: “By now my daughter must be dead, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will come to life.”
Then Jesus got up and, with his disciples, followed him.
And look! a woman suffering for  years from a flow of blood approached from behind and touched the fringe of his outer garment,
for she kept saying to herself: “If I only touch his outer garment, I will get well.”
Jesus turned around and, noticing her, said: “Take courage, daughter! Your faith has made you well.” And from that hour the woman was made well.
When, now, he came into the ruler’s house and caught sight of the flute players and the crowd making a commotion,
Jesus said: “Leave the place, for the little girl did not die but is sleeping.” At this they began to laugh at him scornfully.
As soon as the crowd had been sent outside, he went in and took hold of her hand, and the little girl got up.
Of course, the talk about this spread into all that region.
As Jesus moved on from there, two blind men followed him, shouting out: “Have mercy on us, Son of David.”
After he had gone into the house, the blind men came to him, and Jesus asked them: “Do you have faith that I can do this?” They answered him: “Yes, Lord.”
So he summoned his  disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, in order to expel these and to cure every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity.
The names of the  apostles are these: First, Simon, the one called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebʹe·dee and John his brother;
Philip and Bar·tholʹo·mew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Al·phaeʹus; and Thad·daeʹus;
Simon the Ca·na·naeʹan; and Judas Is·carʹi·ot, who later betrayed him.
These  Jesus sent out, giving them these instructions: “Do not go off into the road of the nations, and do not enter any Sa·marʹi·tan city;
but instead, go continually to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
As you go, preach, saying: ‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’
Cure the sick, raise up the dead, make lepers clean, expel demons. You received free, give free.
Do not acquire gold or silver or copper for your money belts,
or a food pouch for the trip, or two garments, or sandals, or a staff, for the worker deserves his food.
“Into whatever city or village you enter, search out who in it is deserving, and stay there until you leave.
When you enter the house, greet the household.
If the house is deserving, let the peace you wish it come upon it; but if it is not deserving, let the peace from you return upon you.
Wherever anyone does not receive you or listen to your words, on going out of that house or that city, shake the dust off your feet.
Truly I say to you, it will be more endurable for the land of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah on Judgment Day than for that city.
“Look! I am sending you out as sheep among wolves; so prove yourselves cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves.
Be on your guard against men, for they will hand you over to local courts and they will scourge you in their synagogues.
And you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a witness to them and the nations.
However, when they hand you over, do not become anxious about how or what you are to speak, for what you are to speak will be given you in that hour;
for the ones speaking are not just you, but it is the spirit of your Father that speaks by you.
Further, brother will hand brother over to death, and a father his child, and children will rise up against parents and will have them put to death.
And you will be hated by all people on account of my name, but the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
When they persecute you in one city, flee to another; for truly I say to you, you will by no means complete the circuit of the cities of Israel until the Son of man arrives.
“A student is not above his teacher, nor a slave above his master.
It is enough for the student to become as his teacher, and the slave as his master. If people have called the master of the house Be·elʹze·bub, how much more those of his household?
So do not fear them, for there is nothing covered over that will not become uncovered, and nothing secret that will not become known.
What I tell you in the darkness, say in the light, and what you hear whispered, preach from the housetops.
And do not become fearful of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul; rather, fear him who can destroy both soul and body in Ge·henʹna.
When Jesus had finished giving instructions to his  disciples, he set out from there to teach and preach in their cities.
But John, having heard in jail about the works of the Christ, sent his disciples
to ask him: “Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect a different one?”
In reply Jesus said to them: “Go and report to John what you are hearing and seeing:
The blind are now seeing and the lame are walking, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, the dead are being raised up and the poor are being told the good news.
Happy is the one who finds no cause for stumbling in me.”
While these were on their way, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed being tossed by the wind?
What, then, did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft garments? Why, those wearing soft garments are in the houses of kings.
Really, then, why did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.
This is the one about whom it is written: ‘Look! I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way ahead of you!’
Truly I say to you, among those born of women, there has not been raised up anyone greater than John the Baptist, but a lesser person in the Kingdom of the heavens is greater than he is.
From the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of the heavens is the goal toward which men press, and those pressing forward are seizing it.
For all, the Prophets and the Law, prophesied until John;
and if you are willing to accept it, he is ‘E·liʹjah who is to come.’
Let the one who has ears listen.
“With whom will I compare this generation? It is like young children sitting in the marketplaces who call out to their playmates,
saying: ‘We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we wailed, but you did not beat yourselves in grief.’
Likewise, John came neither eating nor drinking, but people say, ‘He has a demon.’
The Son of man did come eating and drinking, but people say, ‘Look! A man who is a glutton and is given to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ All the same, wisdom is proved righteous by its works.”
Then he began to reproach the cities in which most of his powerful works had taken place, for they did not repent:
“Woe to you, Cho·raʹzin! Woe to you, Beth·saʹi·da! because if the powerful works that took place in you had taken place in Tyre and Siʹdon, they would long ago have repented in sackcloth and ashes.
But I say to you, it will be more endurable for Tyre and Siʹdon on Judgment Day than for you.
And you, Ca·perʹna·um, will you perhaps be exalted to heaven? Down to the Grave you will come; because if the powerful works that took place in you had taken place in Sodʹom, it would have remained until this very day.
But I say to you, it will be more endurable for the land of Sodʹom on Judgment Day than for you.”
At that time Jesus said in response: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and intellectual ones and have revealed them to young children.
Yes, O Father, because this is the way you approved.
All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one fully knows the Son except the Father; neither does anyone fully know the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.
Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you.
At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbath. His disciples got hungry and started to pluck heads of grain and to eat.
At seeing this, the Pharisees said to him: “Look! Your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.”
He said to them: “Have you not read what David did when he and the men with him were hungry?
How he entered into the house of God and they ate the loaves of presentation, something that it was not lawful for him or those with him to eat, but for the priests only?
Or have you not read in the Law that on the Sabbaths the priests in the temple violate the Sabbath and continue guiltless?
But I tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
However, if you had understood what this means, ‘I want mercy and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the guiltless ones.
For the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
After departing from that place, he went into their synagogue,
and look! there was a man with a withered hand! So they asked him, “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath?” so that they might accuse him.
He said to them: “If you have one sheep and that sheep falls into a pit on the Sabbath, is there a man among you who will not grab hold of it and lift it out?
How much more valuable is a man than a sheep! So it is lawful to do a fine thing on the Sabbath.”
Then he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and it was restored sound like the other hand.
But the Pharisees went out and conspired against him to kill him.
Having come to know this, Jesus departed from there. Many also followed him, and he cured them all,
but he sternly ordered them not to make him known,
in order to fulfill what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, who said:
“Look! My servant whom I chose, my beloved, whom I have approved! I will put my spirit upon him, and what justice is he will make clear to the nations.
He will not quarrel nor cry aloud, nor will anyone hear his voice in the main streets.
No bruised reed will he crush, and no smoldering wick will he extinguish, until he brings justice with success.
Indeed, in his name nations will hope.”
Then they brought him a demon-possessed man who was blind and speechless, and he cured him, so that the speechless man could speak and see.
Well, all the crowds were astounded and began to say: “May this not perhaps be the Son of David?”
At hearing this, the Pharisees said: “This fellow does not expel the demons except by means of Be·elʹze·bub, the ruler of the demons.”
Knowing their thoughts, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
In the same way, if Satan expels Satan, he has become divided against himself; how, then, will his kingdom stand?
Moreover, if I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, by whom do your sons expel them? This is why they will be your judges.
But if it is by means of God’s spirit that I expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken you.
On that day Jesus left the house and was sitting by the sea.
And such large crowds gathered to him that he went aboard a boat and sat down, and all the crowd was standing on the beach.
Then he told them many things by illustrations, saying: “Look! A sower went out to sow.
As he was sowing, some seeds fell alongside the road, and the birds came and ate them up.
Others fell on rocky ground where there was not much soil, and they immediately sprang up because the soil was not deep.
But when the sun rose, they were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up and choked them.
Still others fell on the fine soil, and they began to yield fruit, this one  times more, that one , the other .
Let the one who has ears listen.”
So the disciples came and said to him: “Why do you speak to them by the use of illustrations?”
In reply he said: “To you it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the Kingdom of the heavens, but to them it is not granted.
For whoever has, more will be given him, and he will be made to abound; but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.
That is why I speak to them by the use of illustrations; for looking, they look in vain, and hearing, they hear in vain, nor do they get the sense of it.
And the prophecy of Isaiah is being fulfilled in their case. It says: ‘You will indeed hear but by no means get the sense of it, and you will indeed look but by no means see.
For the heart of this people has grown unreceptive, and with their ears they have heard without response, and they have shut their eyes, so that they might never see with their eyes and hear with their ears and get the sense of it with their hearts and turn back and I heal them.’
“However, happy are your eyes because they see and your ears because they hear.
For truly I say to you, many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things you are observing but did not see them, and to hear the things you are hearing but did not hear them.
“Now listen to the illustration of the man who sowed.
Where anyone hears the word of the Kingdom but does not get the sense of it, the wicked one comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart; this is the one sown alongside the road.
As for the one sown on rocky ground, this is the one hearing the word and at once accepting it with joy.
Yet, he has no root in himself but continues for a time, and after tribulation or persecution has arisen on account of the word, he is at once stumbled.
As for the one sown among the thorns, this is the one hearing the word, but the anxiety of this system of things and the deceptive power of riches choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
As for the one sown upon the fine soil, this is the one hearing the word and getting the sense of it, who really does bear fruit and produces, this one  times more, that one , the other .”
He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a man who sowed fine seed in his field.
While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat and left.
When the stalk sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared.
So the slaves of the master of the house came and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow fine seed in your field? How, then, does it have weeds?’
He said to them, ‘An enemy, a man, did this.’ The slaves said to him, ‘Do you want us, then, to go out and collect them?’
At that time Herod, the district ruler, heard the report about Jesus
and said to his servants: “This is John the Baptist. He was raised up from the dead, and this is why these powerful works are operating in him.”
Herod had arrested John and had bound him and imprisoned him because of He·roʹdi·as, the wife of Philip his brother.
For John had been saying to him: “It is not lawful for you to have her.”
However, although he wanted to kill him, he feared the crowd, because they took him for a prophet.
But when Herod’s birthday was being celebrated, the daughter of He·roʹdi·as danced for the occasion and pleased Herod so much
that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
Then she, at her mother’s prompting, said: “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
Grieved though he was, the king, out of regard for his oaths and for those dining with him, commanded it to be given.
So he sent and had John beheaded in the prison.
His head was brought on a platter and given to the girl, and she brought it to her mother.
Later his disciples came and removed his corpse and buried him; then they came and reported to Jesus.
At hearing this, Jesus departed from there by boat into an isolated place to be alone. But the crowds, getting to hear of it, followed him on foot from the cities.
When he came ashore, he saw a large crowd, and he felt pity for them, and he cured their sick ones.
But when evening fell, his disciples came to him and said: “The place is isolated and the hour is already late; send the crowds away, so that they may go into the villages and buy themselves food.”
However, Jesus said to them: “They do not have to leave; you give them something to eat.”
They said to him: “We have nothing here except five loaves and two fish.”
He said: “Bring them here to me.”
And he instructed the crowds to recline on the grass. Then he took the five loaves and two fish, and looking up to heaven, he said a blessing, and after breaking the loaves, he gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds.
So they all ate and were satisfied, and they took up the leftover fragments,  baskets full.
Now those eating were about , men, as well as women and young children.
Then, without delay, he made his disciples board the boat and go ahead of him to the opposite shore, while he sent the crowds away.
After sending the crowds away, he went up on the mountain by himself to pray. When evening came, he was there alone.
By now the boat was many hundreds of yards away from land, struggling against the waves because the wind was against them.
But in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea.
When they caught sight of him walking on the sea, the disciples were troubled, saying: “It is an apparition!” And they cried out in their fear.
But at once Jesus spoke to them, saying: “Take courage! It is I; do not be afraid.”
Peter answered him: “Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you over the waters.”
Then there came to Jesus from Jerusalem Pharisees and scribes, saying:
“Why do your disciples overstep the tradition of the men of former times? For example, they do not wash their hands when about to eat a meal.”
In reply he said to them: “Why do you overstep the commandment of God because of your tradition?
For example, God said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Let the one who speaks abusively of his father or mother be put to death.’
But you say, ‘Whoever says to his father or mother: “Whatever I have that could benefit you is a gift dedicated to God,”
he need not honor his father at all.’ So you have made the word of God invalid because of your tradition.
You hypocrites, Isaiah aptly prophesied about you when he said:
‘This people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far removed from me.
It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’”
With that he called the crowd near and said to them: “Listen and get the sense of it:
It is not what enters into a man’s mouth that defiles him, but it is what comes out of his mouth that defiles him.”
Then the disciples came and said to him: “Do you know that the Pharisees were stumbled at hearing what you said?”
In reply he said: “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted.
Let them be. Blind guides is what they are. If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”
Peter responded: “Make the illustration plain to us.”
At this he said: “Are you also still without understanding?
Are you not aware that whatever enters into the mouth passes through the stomach and is discharged into the sewer?
However, whatever comes out of the mouth comes from the heart, and those things defile a man.
For example, out of the heart come wicked reasonings: murders, adulteries, sexual immorality, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies.
These are the things that defile a man; but to take a meal with unwashed hands does not defile a man.”
Leaving there, Jesus now went into the region of Tyre and Siʹdon.
And look! a Phoe·niʹcian woman from that region came and cried out: “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David. My daughter is cruelly demon possessed.”
But he did not say a word in answer to her. So his disciples came and began to urge him: “Send her away, because she keeps crying out after us.”
He answered: “I was not sent to anyone except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
But the woman came and did obeisance to him, saying: “Lord, help me!”
In answer he said: “It is not right to take the bread of the children and throw it to the little dogs.”
She said: “Yes, Lord, but really the little dogs do eat of the crumbs falling from the table of their masters.”
Then Jesus replied to her: “O woman, great is your faith; let it happen to you as you wish.” And her daughter was healed from that hour on.
Here the Pharisees and Sadducees approached him, and to test him, they asked him to display to them a sign from heaven.
In reply he said to them: “When evening falls, you say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is fire-red,’
and in the morning, ‘It will be wintry, rainy weather today, for the sky is fire-red but gloomy.’ You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but the signs of the times you cannot interpret.
A wicked and adulterous generation keeps seeking a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Joʹnah.” With that he went away, leaving them behind.
Now the disciples crossed to the other side and forgot to take bread along.
Jesus said to them: “Keep your eyes open and watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
So they began to reason among themselves, saying: “We did not take any loaves along.”
Knowing this, Jesus said: “Why are you discussing among yourselves that you have no loaves, you with little faith?
Do you not yet see the point, or do you not remember the five loaves in the case of the , and how many baskets you took up?
Or the seven loaves in the case of the , and how many large baskets you took up?
How is it you do not discern that I did not speak to you about bread? But watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
Then they grasped that he said to watch out, not for the leaven of bread, but for the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
When he had come into the region of Caes·a·reʹa Phi·lipʹpi, Jesus asked his disciples: “Who are men saying the Son of man is?”
They said: “Some say John the Baptist, others E·liʹjah, and still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
He said to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?”
Simon Peter answered: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
In response Jesus said to him: “Happy you are, Simon son of Joʹnah, because flesh and blood did not reveal it to you, but my Father in the heavens did.
Also, I say to you: You are Peter, and on this rock I will build my congregation, and the gates of the Grave will not overpower it.
I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of the heavens, and whatever you may bind on earth will already be bound in the heavens, and whatever you may loosen on earth will already be loosened in the heavens.”
Then he sternly instructed the disciples not to tell anybody that he was the Christ.
From that time forward, Jesus began explaining to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes and be killed, and on the third day be raised up.
At this Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord; you will not have this happen to you at all.”
But turning his back, he said to Peter: “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”
Then Jesus said to his disciples: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and keep following me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
Really, what good will it do a man if he gains the whole world but loses his life? Or what will a man give in exchange for his life?
For the Son of man is to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will repay each one according to his behavior.
Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom.”
Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and his brother John along and led them up into a lofty mountain by themselves.
And he was transfigured before them; his face shone as the sun, and his outer garments became brilliant as the light.
And look! there appeared to them Moses and E·liʹjah conversing with him.
Then Peter said to Jesus: “Lord, it is fine for us to be here. If you wish, I will erect three tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.”
While he was still speaking, look! a bright cloud overshadowed them, and look! a voice out of the cloud said: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.”
At hearing this, the disciples fell facedown and became very much afraid.
Then Jesus came near, and touching them, he said: “Get up. Have no fear.”
When they looked up, they saw no one but Jesus himself.
As they were descending from the mountain, Jesus commanded them: “Tell the vision to no one until the Son of man is raised up from the dead.”
However, the disciples put the question to him: “Why, then, do the scribes say that E·liʹjah must come first?”
In reply he said: “E·liʹjah is indeed coming and will restore all things.
However, I say to you that E·liʹjah has already come, and they did not recognize him but did whatever they wanted with him. In this way also, the Son of man is going to suffer at their hands.”
Then the disciples perceived that he spoke to them about John the Baptist.
When they came toward the crowd, a man approached him, knelt down to him, and said:
“Lord, have mercy on my son, because he is an epileptic and is ill. He falls often into the fire and often into the water.
I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure him.”
In reply Jesus said: “O faithless and twisted generation, how long must I continue with you? How long must I put up with you? Bring him here to me.”
Then Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of him, and the boy was cured from that hour.
Then the disciples came to Jesus privately and said: “Why could we not expel it?”
He said to them: “Because of your little faith. For truly I say to you, if you have faith the size of a mustard grain, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move, and nothing will be impossible for you.”
——
It was while they were gathered together in Galʹi·lee that Jesus said to them: “The Son of man is going to be betrayed into men’s hands,
and they will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised up.” And they were very much grieved.
After they arrived in Ca·perʹna·um, the men collecting the two drachmas tax approached Peter and said: “Does your teacher not pay the two drachmas tax?”
He said: “Yes.” However, when he entered the house, Jesus spoke to him first and said: “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive duties or head tax? From their sons or from the strangers?”
When he said: “From the strangers,” Jesus said to him: “Really, then, the sons are tax-free.
But that we do not cause them to stumble, go to the sea, cast a fishhook, and take the first fish that comes up, and when you open its mouth, you will find a silver coin. Take that and give it to them for me and you.”
In that hour the disciples came near to Jesus and said: “Who really is greatest in the Kingdom of the heavens?”
So calling a young child to him, he stood him in their midst
and said: “Truly I say to you, unless you turn around and become as young children, you will by no means enter into the Kingdom of the heavens.
Therefore, whoever will humble himself like this young child is the one who is the greatest in the Kingdom of the heavens;
and whoever receives one such young child on the basis of my name receives me also.
But whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have faith in me, it would be better for him to have hung around his neck a millstone that is turned by a donkey and to be sunk in the open sea.
“Woe to the world because of the stumbling blocks! Of course, it is inevitable that stumbling blocks will come, but woe to the man through whom the stumbling block comes!
If, then, your hand or your foot makes you stumble, cut it off and throw it away from you. It is better for you to enter into life maimed or lame than to be thrown with two hands or two feet into the everlasting fire.
Also, if your eye makes you stumble, tear it out and throw it away from you. It is better for you to enter one-eyed into life than to be thrown with two eyes into the fiery Ge·henʹna.
See that you do not despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that their angels in heaven always look upon the face of my Father who is in heaven.
——
“What do you think? If a man has  sheep and one of them strays, will he not leave the  on the mountains and set out on a search for the one that is straying?
And if he finds it, I certainly tell you, he rejoices more over it than over the  that have not strayed.
Likewise, it is not a desirable thing to my Father who is in heaven for even one of these little ones to perish.
“Moreover, if your brother commits a sin, go and reveal his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.
But if he does not listen, take along with you one or two more, so that on the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter may be established.
If he does not listen to them, speak to the congregation. If he does not listen even to the congregation, let him be to you just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector.
“Truly I say to you, whatever things you may bind on earth will be things already bound in heaven, and whatever things you may loosen on earth will be things already loosened in heaven.
Again I tell you truly, if two of you on earth agree concerning anything of importance that they should request, it will take place for them on account of my Father in heaven.
For where there are two or three gathered together in my name, there I am in their midst.”
Then Peter came and said to him: “Lord, how many times is my brother to sin against me and am I to forgive him? Up to seven times?”
Jesus said to him: “I say to you, not up to seven times, but up to  times.
“That is why the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a king who wanted to settle accounts with his slaves.
When he started to settle them, a man was brought in who owed him , talents.
But because he did not have the means to pay it back, his master ordered him and his wife and his children and all the things he owned to be sold and payment to be made.
So the slave fell down and did obeisance to him, saying, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay back everything to you.’
Moved with pity at this, the master of that slave let him off and canceled his debt.
But that slave went out and found one of his fellow slaves, who owed him  de·narʹi·i, and grabbed him and began to choke him, saying, ‘Pay back whatever you owe.’
When Jesus had finished speaking these things, he departed from Galʹi·lee and came to the borders of Ju·deʹa across the Jordan.
Also, large crowds followed him, and he cured them there.
And Pharisees came to him intent on testing him, and they asked: “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife on every sort of grounds?”
In reply he said: “Have you not read that the one who created them from the beginning made them male and female
and said: ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and will stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh’?
So that they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has yoked together, let no man put apart.”
They said to him: “Why, then, did Moses direct giving a certificate of dismissal and divorcing her?”
He said to them: “Out of regard for your hard-heartedness, Moses made the concession to you of divorcing your wives, but that has not been the case from the beginning.
I say to you that whoever divorces his wife, except on the grounds of sexual immorality, and marries another commits adultery.”
The disciples said to him: “If that is the situation of a man with his wife, it is not advisable to marry.”
He said to them: “Not all men make room for the saying, but only those who have the gift.
For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs on account of the Kingdom of the heavens. Let the one who can make room for it make room for it.”
Then young children were brought to him for him to place his hands on them and offer prayer, but the disciples reprimanded them.
Jesus, however, said: “Let the young children alone, and do not try to stop them from coming to me, for the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to such ones.”
And he placed his hands on them and departed from there.
Now look! someone came up to him and said: “Teacher, what good must I do to gain everlasting life?”
He said to him: “Why do you ask me about what is good? One there is who is good. If, though, you want to enter into life, observe the commandments continually.”
He said to him: “Which ones?” Jesus said: “You must not murder, you must not commit adultery, you must not steal, you must not bear false witness,
honor your father and your mother, and you must love your neighbor as yourself.”
The young man said to him: “I have kept all of these; what am I still lacking?”
Jesus said to him: “If you want to be perfect, go sell your belongings and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come be my follower.”
When the young man heard this, he went away grieved, for he had many possessions.
Then Jesus said to his disciples: “Truly I say to you that it will be difficult for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of the heavens.
Again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God.”
When the disciples heard that, they were greatly astounded, saying: “Who really can be saved?”
Looking at them intently, Jesus said to them: “With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”
Then Peter said in reply: “Look! We have left all things and followed you; what, then, will there be for us?”
Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you, in the re-creation, when the Son of man sits down on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will sit on  thrones, judging the  tribes of Israel.
“For the Kingdom of the heavens is like the master of a house who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
After he had agreed with the workers for a de·narʹi·us a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
Going out also about the third hour, he saw others standing unemployed in the marketplace;
and to those he said, ‘You too go into the vineyard, and I will give you whatever is fair.’
So off they went. Again he went out about the sixth hour and the ninth hour and did likewise.
Finally, about the th hour, he went out and found others standing around, and he said to them, ‘Why have you been standing here all day unemployed?’
They replied, ‘Because nobody has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You too go into the vineyard.’
“When evening came, the master of the vineyard said to his man in charge, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, starting with the last and ending with the first.’
When the th-hour men came, they each received a de·narʹi·us.
So when the first came, they assumed that they would receive more, but they too were paid at the rate of a de·narʹi·us.
On receiving it, they began to complain against the master of the house
and said, ‘These last men put in one hour’s work; still you made them equal to us who bore the burden of the day and the burning heat!’
But he said in reply to one of them, ‘Fellow, I do you no wrong. You agreed with me for a de·narʹi·us, did you not?
Take what is yours and go. I want to give to this last one the same as to you.
Do I not have the right to do what I want with my own things? Or is your eye envious because I am good?’
In this way, the last ones will be first, and the first ones last.”
While going up to Jerusalem, Jesus took the  disciples aside privately and said to them on the road:
“Look! We are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes. They will condemn him to death
and hand him over to men of the nations to be mocked and scourged and executed on a stake; and on the third day he will be raised up.”
Then the mother of the sons of Zebʹe·dee approached him with her sons, doing obeisance and asking for something from him.
He said to her: “What do you want?” She replied to him: “Give the word that these two sons of mine may sit down, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your Kingdom.”
Jesus answered: “You do not know what you are asking for. Can you drink the cup that I am about to drink?” They said to him: “We can.”
He said to them: “You will indeed drink my cup, but to sit down at my right hand and at my left is not mine to give, but it belongs to those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”
When the ten others heard about it, they became indignant at the two brothers.
But Jesus called them to him and said: “You know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them and the great men wield authority over them.
This must not be the way among you; but whoever wants to become great among you must be your minister,
and whoever wants to be first among you must be your slave.
Just as the Son of man came, not to be ministered to, but to minister and to give his life as a ransom in exchange for many.”
When they got close to Jerusalem and arrived at Bethʹpha·ge on the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
saying to them: “Go into the village that is within sight, and you will at once find a donkey tied and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me.
If someone says anything to you, you must say, ‘The Lord needs them.’ At that he will immediately send them.”
This actually took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet, who said:
“Tell the daughter of Zion: ‘Look! Your king is coming to you, mild-tempered and mounted on a donkey, yes, on a colt, the offspring of a beast of burden.’”
So the disciples went and did just as Jesus had instructed them.
They brought the donkey and its colt, and they put their outer garments on them, and he sat on them.
Most of the crowd spread their outer garments on the road, while others were cutting down branches from the trees and spreading them on the road.
Moreover, the crowds going ahead of him and those following him kept shouting: “Save, we pray, the Son of David! Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name! Save him, we pray, in the heights above!”
And when he entered Jerusalem, the whole city was in an uproar, saying: “Who is this?”
The crowds kept saying: “This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazʹa·reth of Galʹi·lee!”
Jesus entered the temple and threw out all those selling and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves.
And he said to them: “It is written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it a cave of robbers.”
Also, blind and lame people came to him in the temple, and he cured them.
When the chief priests and the scribes saw the marvelous things he did and the boys who were shouting in the temple, “Save, we pray, the Son of David!” they became indignant
and said to him: “Do you hear what these are saying?” Jesus said to them: “Yes. Did you never read this, ‘Out of the mouth of children and infants, you have brought forth praise’?”
And leaving them behind, he went out of the city to Bethʹa·ny and spent the night there.
While returning to the city early in the morning, he felt hungry.
He caught sight of a fig tree by the road and went to it, but he found nothing on it except leaves, and he said to it: “Let no fruit come from you ever again.” And the fig tree withered instantly.
When the disciples saw this, they were amazed and said: “How is it that the fig tree withered instantly?”
In answer Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what I did to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen.
And all the things you ask in prayer, having faith, you will receive.”
After he went into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came up to him while he was teaching and said: “By what authority do you do these things? And who gave you this authority?”
In reply Jesus said to them: “I will also ask you one thing. If you tell me, then I will also tell you by what authority I do these things:
The baptism by John, from what source was it? From heaven or from men?” But they began to reason among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say to us, ‘Why, then, did you not believe him?’
But if we say, ‘From men,’ we have the crowd to fear, for they all regard John as a prophet.”
So they answered Jesus: “We do not know.” He, in turn, said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.
“What do you think? A man had two children. Going up to the first, he said, ‘Child, go work today in the vineyard.’
Once more Jesus spoke to them with illustrations, saying:
“The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a king who made a marriage feast for his son.
And he sent his slaves to call those invited to the marriage feast, but they were unwilling to come.
Again he sent other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those invited: “Look! I have prepared my dinner, my bulls and fattened animals are slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the marriage feast.”’
But unconcerned they went off, one to his own field, another to his business;
but the rest, seizing his slaves, treated them insolently and killed them.
“The king grew wrathful and sent his armies and killed those murderers and burned their city.
Then he said to his slaves, ‘The marriage feast is ready, but those invited were not worthy.
Therefore, go to the roads leading out of the city, and invite anyone you find to the marriage feast.’
Accordingly, those slaves went out to the roads and gathered all they found, both wicked and good; and the room for the wedding ceremonies was filled with those dining.
“When the king came in to inspect the guests, he caught sight of a man not wearing a marriage garment.
So he said to him, ‘Fellow, how did you get in here without a marriage garment?’ He was speechless.
Then the king said to his servants, ‘Bind him hand and foot and throw him into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’
“For there are many invited, but few chosen.”
Then the Pharisees went and conspired together in order to trap him in his speech.
So they sent their disciples to him, together with party followers of Herod, saying: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth, and you do not seek anyone’s favor, for you do not look at the outward appearance of people.
Tell us, then, what do you think? Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?”
But Jesus, knowing their wickedness, said: “Why do you put me to the test, hypocrites?
Show me the tax coin.” They brought him a de·narʹi·us.
He said to them: “Whose image and inscription is this?”
They said: “Caesar’s.” Then he said to them: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.”
When they heard that, they were amazed, and they left him and went away.
On that day the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:
“Teacher, Moses said: ‘If any man dies without having children, his brother must marry his wife and raise up offspring for his brother.’
Now there were seven brothers with us. The first married and died, and having no offspring, he left his wife for his brother.
The same thing happened with the second and the third, through all seven.
Last of all, the woman died.
So in the resurrection, of the seven, whose wife will she be? For they all had her as a wife.”
Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to his disciples, saying:
“The scribes and the Pharisees have seated themselves in the seat of Moses.
Therefore, all the things they tell you, do and observe, but do not do according to their deeds, for they say but they do not practice what they say.
They bind up heavy loads and put them on the shoulders of men, but they themselves are not willing to budge them with their finger.
All the works they do, they do to be seen by men, for they broaden the scripture-containing cases that they wear as safeguards and lengthen the fringes of their garments.
They like the most prominent place at evening meals and the front seats in the synagogues
and the greetings in the marketplaces and to be called Rabbi by men.
But you, do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your Teacher, and all of you are brothers.
Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth, for one is your Father, the heavenly One.
Neither be called leaders, for your Leader is one, the Christ.
But the greatest one among you must be your minister.
Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you shut up the Kingdom of the heavens before men; for you yourselves do not go in, neither do you permit those on their way in to go in.
——
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you travel over sea and dry land to make one proselyte, and when he becomes one, you make him a subject for Ge·henʹna twice as much so as yourselves.
“Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it is nothing; but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is under obligation.’
Fools and blind ones! Which, in fact, is greater, the gold or the temple that has sanctified the gold?
Moreover, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it is nothing; but if anyone swears by the gift on it, he is under obligation.’
Blind ones! Which, in fact, is greater, the gift or the altar that sanctifies the gift?
Therefore, whoever swears by the altar is swearing by it and by all the things on it;
and whoever swears by the temple is swearing by it and by the One inhabiting it;
and whoever swears by heaven is swearing by the throne of God and by the One sitting on it.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you give the tenth of the mint and the dill and the cumin, but you have disregarded the weightier matters of the Law, namely, justice and mercy and faithfulness. These things it was necessary to do, yet not to disregard the other things.
Blind guides, who strain out the gnat but gulp down the camel!
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside they are full of greediness and self-indulgence.
Blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the dish, so that the outside of it may also become clean.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you resemble whitewashed graves, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful but inside are full of dead men’s bones and of every sort of uncleanness.
In the same way, on the outside you appear righteous to men, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
Now as Jesus was departing from the temple, his disciples approached to show him the buildings of the temple.
In response he said to them: “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you, by no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?”
In answer Jesus said to them: “Look out that nobody misleads you,
for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will mislead many.
You are going to hear of wars and reports of wars. See that you are not alarmed, for these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
“For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.
All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress.
“Then people will hand you over to tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations on account of my name.
Then, too, many will be stumbled and will betray one another and will hate one another.
Many false prophets will arise and mislead many;
and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold.
But the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.
“Therefore, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation, as spoken about by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place (let the reader use discernment),
then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains.
Let the man on the housetop not come down to take the goods out of his house,
and let the man in the field not return to pick up his outer garment.
Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days!
Keep praying that your flight may not occur in wintertime nor on the Sabbath day;
for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.
In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short.
“Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘There!’ do not believe it.
For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will perform great signs and wonders so as to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones.
Look! I have forewarned you.
Therefore, if people say to you, ‘Look! He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; ‘Look! He is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.
For just as the lightning comes out of the east and shines over to the west, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
Wherever the carcass is, there the eagles will be gathered together.
“Then the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.
For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them,
whereas the discreet took oil in their flasks along with their lamps.
While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
Right in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go out to meet him.’
Then all those virgins got up and put their lamps in order.
The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’
The discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may not be enough for both us and you. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’
While they were going off to buy it, the bridegroom came. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut.
Afterward, the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’
In answer he said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’
“Keep on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour.
“For it is just like a man about to travel abroad who summoned his slaves and entrusted his belongings to them.
He gave five talents to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according to his own ability, and he went abroad.
Immediately the one who received the five talents went and did business with them and gained five more.
Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more.
But the slave who received just one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.
“After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them.
So the one who had received the five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted five talents to me; see, I gained five talents more.’
His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
Next the one who had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you entrusted two talents to me; see, I gained two talents more.’
His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
“Finally the slave who had received the one talent came forward and said: ‘Master, I knew you to be a demanding man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow.
So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’
In reply his master said to him: ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow?
Well, then, you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and on my coming I would have received it back with interest.
“‘Therefore, take the talent away from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents.
Now when Jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples:
“You know that two days from now the Passover takes place, and the Son of man will be handed over to be executed on the stake.”
Then the chief priests and the elders of the people gathered in the courtyard of the high priest, who was named Caʹia·phas,
and they conspired together to seize Jesus by cunning and to kill him.
However, they were saying: “Not at the festival, so that there may not be an uproar among the people.”
While Jesus was in Bethʹa·ny in the house of Simon the leper,
a woman with an alabaster jar of costly perfumed oil approached him, and she began pouring it on his head as he was dining.
On seeing this, the disciples became indignant and said: “Why this waste?
For this could have been sold for a great deal of money and given to the poor.”
Aware of this, Jesus said to them: “Why do you try to make trouble for the woman? She did a fine deed toward me.
For you always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.
When she put this perfumed oil on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
Truly I say to you, wherever this good news is preached in all the world, what this woman did will also be told in memory of her.”
Then one of the Twelve, the one called Judas Is·carʹi·ot, went to the chief priests
and said: “What will you give me to betray him to you?” They stipulated to him  silver pieces.
So from then on, he kept looking for a good opportunity to betray him.
On the first day of the Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying: “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?”
He said: “Go into the city to So-and-so and say to him, ‘The Teacher says: “My appointed time is near; I will celebrate the Passover with my disciples at your home.”’”
So the disciples did as Jesus instructed them and prepared for the Passover.
When evening came, he was reclining at the table with the  disciples.
While they were eating, he said: “Truly I say to you, one of you will betray me.”
Being very much grieved at this, each and every one began to say to him: “Lord, it is not I, is it?”
In reply he said: “The one who dips his hand with me into the bowl is the one who will betray me.
True, the Son of man is going away, just as it is written about him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”
Judas, who was about to betray him, replied: “It is not I, is it, Rabbi?” Jesus said to him: “You yourself said it.”
As they continued eating, Jesus took a loaf, and after saying a blessing, he broke it, and giving it to the disciples, he said: “Take, eat. This means my body.”
And taking a cup, he offered thanks and gave it to them, saying: “Drink out of it, all of you,
for this means my ‘blood of the covenant,’ which is to be poured out in behalf of many for forgiveness of sins.
When morning came, all the chief priests and the elders of the people consulted together against Jesus to put him to death.
After binding him, they led him off and handed him over to Pilate, the governor.
Then Judas, his betrayer, seeing that Jesus had been condemned, felt remorse and brought the  pieces of silver back to the chief priests and elders,
saying: “I sinned when I betrayed innocent blood.” They said: “What is that to us? You must see to it!”
So he threw the silver pieces into the temple and departed. Then he went off and hanged himself.
But the chief priests took the silver pieces and said: “It is not lawful to put them into the sacred treasury, because they are the price of blood.”
After consulting together, they used the money to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for strangers.
Therefore, that field has been called Field of Blood to this very day.
Then what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: “And they took the  silver pieces, the price that was set on the man, the one on whom a price was set by some of the sons of Israel,
and they gave them for the potter’s field, according to what Jehovah had commanded me.”
Jesus now stood before the governor, and the governor put the question to him: “Are you the King of the Jews?” Jesus replied: “You yourself say it.”
But while he was being accused by the chief priests and elders, he made no answer.
Then Pilate said to him: “Do you not hear how many things they are testifying against you?”
But he did not answer him, no, not a word, so that the governor was very surprised.
Now from festival to festival, it was the custom of the governor to release a prisoner to the crowd, whomever they wanted.
Just at that time they were holding a notorious prisoner called Bar·abʹbas.
So when they were gathered together, Pilate said to them: “Which one do you want me to release to you, Bar·abʹbas or Jesus the so-called Christ?”
For Pilate was aware that out of envy they had handed him over.
Moreover, while he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent a message to him, saying: “Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I suffered a lot today in a dream because of him.”
But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Bar·abʹbas, but to have Jesus put to death.
In response the governor said to them: “Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” They said: “Bar·abʹbas.”
Pilate said to them: “What, then, should I do with Jesus the so-called Christ?” They all said: “To the stake with him!”
He said: “Why? What bad thing did he do?” Still they kept shouting out all the more: “To the stake with him!”
Seeing that it did no good but, rather, an uproar was arising, Pilate took water and washed his hands before the crowd, saying: “I am innocent of the blood of this man. You yourselves must see to it.”
At that all the people said in answer: “Let his blood come upon us and upon our children.”
Then he released Bar·abʹbas to them, but he had Jesus whipped and handed him over to be executed on the stake.
Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the governor’s residence and gathered the whole body of troops together around him.
And disrobing him, they draped him with a scarlet cloak,
After the Sabbath, when it was growing light on the first day of the week, Mary Magʹda·lene and the other Mary came to view the grave.
And look! a great earthquake had taken place, for Jehovah’s angel had descended from heaven and had come and rolled away the stone, and he was sitting on it.
His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing was as white as snow.
Yes, out of their fear of him, the watchmen trembled and became as dead men.
But the angel said to the women: “Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus who was executed on the stake.
He is not here, for he was raised up, just as he said. Come, see the place where he was lying.
Then go quickly and tell his disciples that he was raised up from the dead, for look! he is going ahead of you into Galʹi·lee. You will see him there. Look! I have told you.”
So, quickly leaving the memorial tomb, with fear and great joy, they ran to report to his disciples.
And look! Jesus met them and said: “Good day!” They approached and took hold of his feet and did obeisance to him.
Then Jesus said to them: “Have no fear! Go, report to my brothers so that they may go to Galʹi·lee, and there they will see me.”
While they were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests all the things that had happened.
And after these had gathered with the elders and had consulted together, they gave a considerable number of silver pieces to the soldiers
and said: “Say, ‘His disciples came in the night and stole him while we were sleeping.’
And if this gets to the governor’s ears, we will explain the matter to him and you will not need to worry.”
So they took the silver pieces and did as they were instructed, and this story has been spread abroad among the Jews up to this very day.
However, the  disciples went to Galʹi·lee to the mountain where Jesus had arranged for them to meet.
When they saw him, they did obeisance, but some doubted.
Jesus approached and spoke to them, saying: “All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.
Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit,
teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you. And look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”
The beginning of the good news about Jesus Christ, the Son of God:
Just as it is written in Isaiah the prophet: “(Look! I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way.)
A voice of one crying out in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah! Make his roads straight.’”
John the Baptizer was in the wilderness, preaching baptism in symbol of repentance for forgiveness of sins.
And all the territory of Ju·deʹa and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem were going out to him, and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, openly confessing their sins.
Now John wore clothing of camel’s hair and a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
And he was preaching: “Someone stronger than I am is coming after me, the lace of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.
I baptized you with water, but he will baptize you with holy spirit.”
In the course of those days, Jesus came from Nazʹa·reth of Galʹi·lee and was baptized in the Jordan by John.
And immediately on coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens being parted and, like a dove, the spirit coming down upon him.
And a voice came out of the heavens: “You are my Son, the beloved; I have approved you.”
And immediately the spirit impelled him to go into the wilderness.
So he continued in the wilderness for  days, being tempted by Satan. He was with the wild beasts, but the angels were ministering to him.
Now after John was arrested, Jesus went into Galʹi·lee, preaching the good news of God
and saying: “The appointed time has been fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God has drawn near. Repent, and have faith in the good news.”
While walking alongside the Sea of Galʹi·lee, he saw Simon and Simon’s brother Andrew casting their nets into the sea, for they were fishermen.
However, after some days he again entered into Ca·perʹna·um, and the word spread that he was at home.
And so many gathered that there was no more room, not even around the door, and he began to speak the word to them.
And they brought him a paralytic carried by four men.
But they could not bring him right to Jesus because of the crowd, so they removed the roof above Jesus, and after digging an opening, they lowered the stretcher on which the paralytic was lying.
When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic: “Child, your sins are forgiven.”
Now some of the scribes were there, sitting and reasoning in their hearts:
“Why is this man talking this way? He is blaspheming. Who can forgive sins except one, God?”
But immediately Jesus discerned by his spirit that they were reasoning that way among themselves, so he said to them: “Why are you reasoning these things in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and pick up your stretcher and walk’?
But in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority to forgive sins on earth—” he said to the paralytic:
“I say to you, Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
At that he got up and immediately picked up his stretcher and walked out in front of them all. So they were all astonished, and they glorified God, saying: “We have never seen anything like this.”
Again he went out alongside the sea, and all the crowd kept coming to him, and he began to teach them.
And as he was passing by, he caught sight of Leʹvi the son of Al·phaeʹus sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.” At that he rose up and followed him.
Later he was dining in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners were dining with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many of them who were following him.
But when the scribes of the Pharisees saw that he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors, they began saying to his disciples: “Does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
Once again he entered into a synagogue, and a man with a withered hand was there.
So they were watching him closely to see whether he would cure the man on the Sabbath, in order to accuse him.
He said to the man with the withered hand: “Get up and come to the center.”
Next he said to them: “Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save a life or to kill?” But they kept silent.
After looking around at them with indignation, being thoroughly grieved at the insensibility of their hearts, he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and his hand was restored.
At that the Pharisees went out and immediately began holding council with the party followers of Herod against him, in order to kill him.
But Jesus departed for the sea along with his disciples, and a great multitude from Galʹi·lee and from Ju·deʹa followed him.
Even from Jerusalem and from Id·u·meʹa and from across the Jordan and from around Tyre and Siʹdon, a great multitude came to him when they heard about the many things he was doing.
And he told his disciples to have a small boat ready for him so that the crowd would not press in on him.
Because he cured many, all those who had serious diseases were crowding around him to touch him.
Even the unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, would fall down before him and cry out and say: “You are the Son of God.”
But many times he sternly ordered them not to make him known.
He ascended a mountain and summoned those whom he wanted, and they came to him.
And he formed a group of , whom he also named apostles, those who were to accompany him and whom he would send out to preach
and to have authority to expel demons.
And the group of  that he formed were Simon, to whom he also gave the name Peter,
Again he began teaching beside the sea, and a very large crowd gathered near him. So he went aboard a boat and sat in it away from the shore, but the whole crowd was next to the sea, along the shore.
And he began to teach them many things with illustrations, and while he was teaching, he said to them:
“Listen. Look! The sower went out to sow.
As he was sowing, some seeds fell alongside the road, and the birds came and ate them up.
Others fell on rocky ground where there was not much soil, and they immediately sprang up because the soil was not deep.
But when the sun rose, they were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
Other seeds fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up and choked them, and they yielded no fruit.
But others fell on the fine soil, and growing up and increasing, they began to yield fruit, and they were bearing , , and  times more.”
Then he added: “Let the one who has ears to listen, listen.”
Now when he was alone, those around him with the Twelve began questioning him about the illustrations.
He said to them: “To you the sacred secret of the Kingdom of God has been given, but to those outside all things are in illustrations,
so that, though looking, they may look and still not see, and though hearing, they may hear and still not get the sense of it; nor will they ever turn back and receive forgiveness.”
Further, he said to them: “You do not know this illustration, so how will you understand all the other illustrations?
“The sower sows the word.
These, then, are the ones alongside the road where the word is sown; but as soon as they have heard it, Satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.
Likewise, these are the ones sown on rocky ground; as soon as they have heard the word, they accept it with joy.
Then they came to the other side of the sea into the region of the Gerʹa·senes.
And immediately after Jesus got out of the boat, a man under the power of an unclean spirit met him from among the tombs.
His haunt was among the tombs, and up to that time, absolutely no one was able to bind him securely, even with a chain.
He had often been bound with fetters and chains, but he snapped the chains apart and smashed the fetters; and nobody had the strength to subdue him.
And continually, night and day, he was crying out in the tombs and in the mountains and slashing himself with stones.
But on catching sight of Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed down to him.
Then he cried out with a loud voice: “What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I put you under oath by God not to torment me.”
For Jesus had been saying to it: “Come out of the man, you unclean spirit.”
But Jesus asked him: “What is your name?” And he replied: “My name is Legion, because there are many of us.”
And he kept pleading with Jesus not to send the spirits out of the country.
Now a great herd of swine was feeding there at the mountain.
So the spirits pleaded with him: “Send us into the swine, so that we may enter into them.”
And he gave them permission. With that the unclean spirits came out and went into the swine, and the herd rushed over the precipice into the sea, about , of them, and were drowned in the sea.
But their herders fled and reported it in the city and in the countryside, and people came to see what had happened.
So they came to Jesus and saw the demon-possessed man, the one who previously had the legion, sitting clothed and in his right mind, and they grew fearful.
Also, those who had seen it related to them how this had happened to the demon-possessed man and the swine.
He departed from there and came into his home territory, and his disciples followed him.
When it was the Sabbath, he started teaching in the synagogue, and most who heard him were astounded and said: “Where did this man get these things? And why should this wisdom have been given to him, and such powerful works be performed through his hands?
This is the carpenter, the son of Mary and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas, and Simon, is it not? And his sisters are here with us, are they not?” So they began to stumble because of him.
But Jesus said to them: “A prophet is not without honor except in his home territory and among his relatives and in his own house.”
So he was not able to do any powerful work there except to lay his hands on a few sick people and cure them.
Indeed, he was amazed at their lack of faith. And he went around in a circuit to the villages, teaching.
He now summoned the Twelve and started sending them out two by two, and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits.
Also, he gave them orders to carry nothing for the trip except a staff—no bread, no food pouch, no money in their belts—
but to put on sandals and not to wear two garments.
Further, he said to them: “Wherever you enter into a home, stay there until you leave that place.
And wherever a place will not receive you or listen to you, on going out from there, shake off the dirt that is on your feet for a witness to them.”
Then they set out and preached that people should repent,
and they expelled many demons and greased many sick people with oil and cured them.
Now King Herod heard of this, for the name of Jesus became well-known, and people were saying: “John the Baptizer has been raised up from the dead, and that is why the powerful works are operating in him.”
But others were saying: “It is E·liʹjah.” Still others were saying: “It is a prophet like one of the prophets of old.”
But when Herod heard it, he said: “The John whom I beheaded, this one has been raised up.”
Now the Pharisees and some of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem gathered around him.
And they saw some of his disciples eat their meal with defiled hands, that is, unwashed ones.
(For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash their hands up to the elbow, clinging to the tradition of the men of former times,
and when they come from the market, they do not eat unless they wash themselves. There are many other traditions that they have received and cling to, such as baptisms of cups, pitchers, and copper vessels.)
So these Pharisees and scribes asked him: “Why do your disciples not observe the tradition of the men of former times, but they eat their meal with defiled hands?”
He said to them: “Isaiah aptly prophesied about you hypocrites, as it is written, ‘This people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far removed from me.
It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’
You let go of the commandment of God and cling to the tradition of men.”
Further, he said to them: “You skillfully disregard the commandment of God in order to keep your tradition.
For example, Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Let the one who speaks abusively of his father or mother be put to death.’
But you say, ‘If a man says to his father or his mother: “Whatever I have that could benefit you is corban (that is, a gift dedicated to God),”’
you no longer let him do a single thing for his father or his mother.
Thus you make the word of God invalid by your tradition that you have handed down. And you do many things like this.”
So calling the crowd to him again, he said to them: “Listen to me, all of you, and understand the meaning.
Nothing from outside a man that enters into him can defile him; but the things that come out of a man are the things that defile him.”
——
In those days, there was again a large crowd, and they had nothing to eat. So he summoned the disciples and said to them:
“I feel pity for the crowd, because they have already stayed with me for three days and they have nothing to eat.
If I send them off to their homes hungry, they will give out on the road, and some of them are from far away.”
But his disciples answered him: “From where will anyone get enough bread in this isolated place to satisfy these people?”
At this he asked them: “How many loaves do you have?” They said: “Seven.”
And he instructed the crowd to recline on the ground. Then he took the seven loaves, gave thanks, broke them, and began giving them to his disciples to serve, and they served them to the crowd.
They also had a few small fish, and blessing these, he told them to serve these also.
So they ate and were satisfied, and they took up seven large baskets full of leftover fragments.
Now there were about , men. Then he sent them away.
Immediately he boarded the boat with his disciples and came into the region of Dal·ma·nuʹtha.
Here the Pharisees came and started disputing with him, demanding from him a sign from heaven, to put him to the test.
So he sighed deeply in his spirit and said: “Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly I say, no sign will be given to this generation.”
With that he left them, got aboard again, and went to the opposite shore.
However, they forgot to take bread along, and they had nothing with them in the boat except for one loaf.
And he warned them in no uncertain terms: “Keep your eyes open; look out for the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.”
So they began arguing with one another over the fact that they had no bread.
Furthermore, he said to them: “Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Kingdom of God already having come in power.”
Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and John along and led them up into a lofty mountain by themselves. And he was transfigured before them;
his outer garments began to glisten, becoming far whiter than any clothes cleaner on earth could whiten them.
Also, E·liʹjah with Moses appeared to them, and they were conversing with Jesus.
Then Peter said to Jesus: “Rabbi, it is fine for us to be here. So let us erect three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.”
In fact, he did not know how to react, for they were quite fearful.
And a cloud formed, overshadowing them, and a voice came out of the cloud: “This is my Son, the beloved. Listen to him.”
Then suddenly they looked around and saw that no one was with them any longer except Jesus.
As they were coming down from the mountain, he strictly ordered them not to relate to anybody what they had seen until after the Son of man had risen from the dead.
They took the word to heart, but discussed among themselves what this rising from the dead meant.
And they began to question him, saying: “Why do the scribes say that E·liʹjah must come first?”
He said to them: “E·liʹjah does come first and restore all things; but how is it that it is written about the Son of man that he must undergo many sufferings and be treated with contempt?
But I say to you that E·liʹjah, in fact, has come, and they did to him whatever they wanted, just as it is written about him.”
When they came to the other disciples, they noticed a large crowd around them, and there were scribes arguing with them.
But as soon as all the crowd caught sight of him, they were astonished, and they ran up to him to greet him.
So he asked them: “What are you arguing about with them?”
From there he got up and came to the borders of Ju·deʹa across the Jordan, and again crowds gathered to him. As he was accustomed to do, he again began teaching them.
And Pharisees approached, intent on testing him, and they asked whether it was lawful for a man to divorce a wife.
He answered them: “What did Moses command you?”
They said: “Moses allowed the writing of a certificate of dismissal and divorcing her.”
But Jesus said to them: “Out of regard for your hard-heartedness, he wrote this commandment for you.
However, from the beginning of creation, ‘He made them male and female.
For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother,
and the two will be one flesh,’ so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Therefore, what God has yoked together, let no man put apart.”
When they were again in the house, the disciples began to question him about this.
He said to them: “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her,
and if ever a woman after divorcing her husband marries another, she commits adultery.”
People now began bringing him young children for him to touch them, but the disciples reprimanded them.
At seeing this, Jesus was indignant and said to them: “Let the young children come to me; do not try to stop them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such ones.
Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a young child will by no means enter into it.”
And he took the children into his arms and began blessing them, laying his hands on them.
Now when they were getting near to Jerusalem, to Bethʹpha·ge and Bethʹa·ny at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples
and told them: “Go into the village that is within sight, and as soon as you enter it, you will find a colt tied on which no man has sat until now. Untie it and bring it here.
And if anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs it and will send it back here right away.’”
So they went away and found the colt tied at a door, outside on the side street, and they untied it.
But some of those standing there said to them: “What are you doing untying the colt?”
They told them just what Jesus had said, and they let them go.
And they brought the colt to Jesus, and they put their outer garments on it, and he sat on it.
Also, many spread their outer garments on the road, but others cut down foliage from the fields.
And those going in front and those coming behind kept shouting: “Save, we pray! Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name!
Blessed is the coming Kingdom of our father David! Save, we pray, in the heights above!”
And he entered Jerusalem and went into the temple, and he looked around at everything, but since the hour was already late, he went out to Bethʹa·ny with the Twelve.
The next day when they were leaving Bethʹa·ny, he felt hungry.
From a distance he caught sight of a fig tree that had leaves, and he went to see whether he could find something on it. But on coming to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.
So he said to it: “Let no one eat fruit from you ever again.” And his disciples were listening.
They now came to Jerusalem. There he entered the temple and started to throw out those selling and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves,
and he would not let anyone carry a utensil through the temple.
Then he started to speak to them with illustrations: “A man planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a vat for the winepress and erected a tower; then he leased it to cultivators and traveled abroad.
In due season he sent a slave to the cultivators to collect some of the fruits of the vineyard from them.
But they took him, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
Again he sent another slave to them, and that one they struck on the head and dishonored.
And he sent another, and that one they killed, and many others, some of whom they beat and some of whom they killed.
One more he had, a beloved son. He sent him to them last, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
But those cultivators said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
So they took him and killed him and threw him out of the vineyard.
What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and kill the cultivators and will give the vineyard to others.
Did you never read this scripture: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone.
This has come from Jehovah, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
At that they wanted to seize him, but they feared the crowd, for they knew that he spoke the illustration with them in mind. So they left him and went away.
Next they sent to him some of the Pharisees and of the party followers of Herod in order to catch him in his speech.
On arriving, these said to him: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and you do not seek anyone’s favor, for you do not look at the outward appearance of people, but you teach the way of God in line with truth. Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?
Should we pay, or should we not pay?” Detecting their hypocrisy, he said to them: “Why do you put me to the test? Bring me a de·narʹi·us to look at.”
They brought one, and he said to them: “Whose image and inscription is this?” They said to him: “Caesar’s.”
As he was going out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him: “Teacher, see! what wonderful stones and buildings!”
However, Jesus said to him: “Do you see these great buildings? By no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
As he was sitting on the Mount of Olives with the temple in view, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately:
“Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign when all these things are to come to a conclusion?”
So Jesus began to tell them: “Look out that nobody misleads you.
Many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and will mislead many.
Moreover, when you hear of wars and reports of wars, do not be alarmed; these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
“For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom; there will be earthquakes in one place after another; there will also be food shortages. These are a beginning of pangs of distress.
“As for you, look out for yourselves. People will hand you over to local courts, and you will be beaten in synagogues and be put on the stand before governors and kings for my sake, for a witness to them.
Also, in all the nations, the good news has to be preached first.
And when they are taking you to hand you over, do not be anxious beforehand about what to say; but whatever is given you in that hour, say this, for you are not the ones speaking, but the holy spirit is.
Furthermore, brother will deliver brother over to death, and a father a child, and children will rise up against parents and have them put to death.
And you will be hated by all people on account of my name. But the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
“However, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation standing where it should not be (let the reader use discernment), then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains.
Let the man on the housetop not come down nor go inside to take anything out of his house;
and let the man in the field not return to the things behind to pick up his outer garment.
Now the Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread was two days later. And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to seize him by cunning and kill him;
for they were saying: “Not at the festival; perhaps there might be an uproar of the people.”
And while he was at Bethʹa·ny dining in the house of Simon the leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of perfumed oil, genuine nard, very expensive. She broke open the alabaster jar and began pouring it on his head.
At this some said to one another indignantly: “Why has this perfumed oil been wasted?
For this perfumed oil could have been sold for more than  de·narʹi·i and the money given to the poor!” And they were greatly annoyed with her.
But Jesus said: “Let her alone. Why do you try to make trouble for her? She did a fine deed toward me.
For you always have the poor with you, and you can do them good whenever you want to, but you will not always have me.
She did what she could; she poured perfumed oil on my body beforehand, in view of the burial.
Truly I say to you, wherever the good news is preached in all the world, what this woman did will also be told in memory of her.”
And Judas Is·carʹi·ot, one of the Twelve, went off to the chief priests in order to betray him to them.
When they heard it, they were delighted and promised to give him silver money. So he began seeking an opportunity to betray him.
Now on the first day of the Unleavened Bread, when they customarily offered up the Passover sacrifice, his disciples said to him: “Where do you want us to go and prepare for you to eat the Passover?”
With that he sent two of his disciples and said to them: “Go into the city, and a man carrying an earthenware water jar will meet you. Follow him,
and wherever he goes inside, say to the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says: “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’
And he will show you a large upper room, furnished and ready. Prepare it for us there.”
So the disciples went out, and they entered the city and found it just as he said to them, and they prepared for the Passover.
Immediately at dawn, the chief priests with the elders and the scribes, indeed, the whole Sanʹhe·drin, consulted together, and they bound Jesus and led him off and handed him over to Pilate.
So Pilate put the question to him: “Are you the King of the Jews?” In answer he said: “You yourself say it.”
But the chief priests were accusing him of many things.
Now Pilate began questioning him again, saying: “Have you no reply to make? See how many charges they are bringing against you.”
But Jesus made no further answer, so that Pilate was amazed.
Well, from festival to festival, he used to release to them one prisoner whom they requested.
At the time the man named Bar·abʹbas was in prison with the seditionists, who in their sedition had committed murder.
So the crowd came up and began to make their request according to what Pilate used to do for them.
He responded to them, saying: “Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?”
For Pilate was aware that out of envy the chief priests had handed him over.
But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Bar·abʹbas to them instead.
Again in reply Pilate said to them: “What, then, should I do with the one you call the King of the Jews?”
Once more they cried out: “To the stake with him!”
But Pilate went on to say to them: “Why? What bad thing did he do?” Still they cried out all the more: “To the stake with him!”
At that Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Bar·abʹbas to them; and after having Jesus whipped, he handed him over to be executed on the stake.
The soldiers now led him off into the courtyard, that is, into the governor’s residence, and they called the whole body of troops together.
So when the Sabbath was over, Mary Magʹda·lene, Mary the mother of James, and Sa·loʹme bought spices in order to come and apply them to his body.
And very early on the first day of the week when the sun had risen, they came to the tomb.
They were saying to one another: “Who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb for us?”
But when they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled away, although it was very large.
When they entered into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were stunned.
He said to them: “Do not be stunned. You are looking for Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ who was executed on the stake. He was raised up. He is not here. Look, here is the place where they laid him.
But go, tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going ahead of you into Galʹi·lee. You will see him there, just as he told you.’”
So when they came out, they fled from the tomb, trembling and overwhelmed with emotion. And they said nothing to anyone, for they were in fear.
Seeing that many have undertaken to compile an account of the facts that are given full credence among us,
just as these were handed down to us by those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and attendants of the message,
I resolved also, because I have traced all things from the start with accuracy, to write them to you in logical order, most excellent The·ophʹi·lus,
so that you may know fully the certainty of the things that you have been taught orally.
In the days of Herod, king of Ju·deʹa, there was a priest named Zech·a·riʹah of the division of A·biʹjah. His wife was from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
They both were righteous before God, walking blamelessly in accord with all the commandments and legal requirements of Jehovah.
But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well along in years.
Now as he was serving as priest in the assignment of his division before God,
according to the established practice of the priesthood it became his turn to offer incense when he entered into the sanctuary of Jehovah.
And the entire multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of offering incense.
Jehovah’s angel appeared to him, standing at the right side of the incense altar.
But Zech·a·riʹah became troubled at the sight, and he was overcome with fear.
However, the angel said to him: “Do not be afraid, Zech·a·riʹah, because your supplication has been favorably heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to name him John.
You will have joy and great gladness, and many will rejoice over his birth,
for he will be great in the sight of Jehovah. But he must drink no wine or any alcoholic drink at all, and he will be filled with holy spirit even from before birth,
and he will turn back many of the sons of Israel to Jehovah their God.
Also, he will go ahead of him with E·liʹjah’s spirit and power, to turn back the hearts of fathers to children and the disobedient ones to the practical wisdom of righteous ones, in order to get ready for Jehovah a prepared people.”
Zech·a·riʹah said to the angel: “How can I be sure of this? For I am old, and my wife is well along in years.”
In reply the angel said to him: “I am Gaʹbri·el, who stands near before God, and I was sent to speak with you and to declare this good news to you.
But look! you will be silent and unable to speak until the day these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their appointed time.”
Meanwhile, the people continued waiting for Zech·a·riʹah, and they were surprised that he delayed so long in the sanctuary.
When he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they perceived that he had just seen a supernatural sight in the sanctuary. He kept making signs to them but remained speechless.
When the days of his holy service were completed, he went off to his home.
Some days later Elizabeth his wife became pregnant, and she kept herself secluded for five months, saying:
Now in those days a decree went out from Caesar Au·gusʹtus for all the inhabited earth to be registered.
(This first registration took place when Qui·rinʹi·us was governor of Syria.)
And all the people went to be registered, each one to his own city.
Of course, Joseph also went up from Galʹi·lee, from the city of Nazʹa·reth, into Ju·deʹa, to David’s city, which is called Bethʹle·hem, because of his being a member of the house and family of David.
He went to get registered with Mary, who had been given him in marriage as promised and who was soon to give birth.
While they were there, the time came for her to give birth.
And she gave birth to her son, the firstborn, and she wrapped him in strips of cloth and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the lodging place.
There were also in the same region shepherds living out of doors and keeping watch in the night over their flocks.
Suddenly Jehovah’s angel stood before them, and Jehovah’s glory gleamed around them, and they became very fearful.
But the angel said to them: “Do not be afraid, for look! I am declaring to you good news of a great joy that all the people will have.
For today there was born to you in David’s city a savior, who is Christ the Lord.
And this is a sign for you: You will find an infant wrapped in strips of cloth and lying in a manger.”
Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army, praising God and saying:
“Glory in the heights above to God, and on earth peace among men of goodwill.”
So when the angels had departed from them into heaven, the shepherds began saying to one another: “Let us by all means go over to Bethʹle·hem and see what has taken place, which Jehovah has made known to us.”
And they went quickly and found Mary as well as Joseph, and the infant lying in the manger.
When they saw this, they made known the message that they had been told concerning this young child.
And all who heard were astonished at what the shepherds told them,
but Mary began to preserve all these sayings, drawing conclusions in her heart.
Then the shepherds went back, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen, just as it had been told to them.
After eight days, when it was time to circumcise him, he was named Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived.
Also, when the time came for purifying them according to the Law of Moses, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to Jehovah,
just as it is written in Jehovah’s Law: “Every firstborn male must be called holy to Jehovah.”
And they offered a sacrifice according to what is said in the Law of Jehovah: “a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.”
In the th year of the reign of Ti·beʹri·us Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Ju·deʹa, Herod was district ruler of Galʹi·lee, Philip his brother was district ruler of the country of It·u·raeʹa and Trach·o·niʹtis, and Ly·saʹni·as was district ruler of Ab·i·leʹne,
in the days of chief priest Anʹnas and of Caʹia·phas, God’s declaration came to John the son of Zech·a·riʹah in the wilderness.
So he went into all the country around the Jordan, preaching baptism in symbol of repentance for forgiveness of sins,
just as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “A voice of one crying out in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah! Make his roads straight.
Every valley must be filled up, and every mountain and hill leveled; the crooked ways must become straight, and the rough ways smooth;
and all flesh will see the salvation of God.’”
So he began to say to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him: “You offspring of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Therefore, produce fruits that befit repentance. Do not start saying to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones.
Indeed, the ax is already lying at the root of the trees. Every tree, then, that does not produce fine fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.”
And the crowds were asking him: “What, then, should we do?”
In reply he said to them: “Let the man who has two garments share with the man who has none, and let the one who has something to eat do the same.”
Even tax collectors came to be baptized, and they said to him: “Teacher, what should we do?”
He said to them: “Do not demand anything more than the tax rate.”
Also, those in military service were asking him: “What should we do?” And he said to them: “Do not harass anybody or accuse anybody falsely, but be satisfied with your provisions.”
Now the people were in expectation and all of them were reasoning in their hearts about John, “May he perhaps be the Christ?”
John gave the answer, saying to all: “I, for my part, baptize you with water, but the one stronger than I am is coming, the lace of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. He will baptize you with holy spirit and with fire.
His winnowing shovel is in his hand to clean up his threshing floor completely and to gather the wheat into his storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.”
He also gave many other exhortations and continued declaring good news to the people.
But Herod the district ruler, because of being reproved by John concerning He·roʹdi·as the wife of his brother and concerning all the wicked deeds that Herod had done,
added this also to all those deeds: He locked John up in prison.
Now when all the people were baptized, Jesus too was baptized. As he was praying, the heaven was opened up,
and the holy spirit in bodily form like a dove came down upon him, and a voice came out of heaven: “You are my Son, the beloved; I have approved you.”
When Jesus began his work, he was about  years old, being the son, as the opinion was,
son of Matʹthat,
Then Jesus, full of holy spirit, turned away from the Jordan, and he was led about by the spirit in the wilderness
for  days, being tempted by the Devil. And he ate nothing in those days, so when they had ended, he felt hungry.
At this the Devil said to him: “If you are a son of God, tell this stone to become a loaf of bread.”
But Jesus answered him: “It is written, ‘Man must not live on bread alone.’”
So he brought him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth in an instant of time.
Then the Devil said to him: “I will give you all this authority and their glory, because it has been handed over to me, and I give it to whomever I wish.
If you, therefore, do an act of worship before me, it will all be yours.”
In reply Jesus said to him: “It is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’”
He then led him into Jerusalem and stationed him on the battlement of the temple and said to him: “If you are a son of God, throw yourself down from here,
for it is written, ‘He will give his angels a command concerning you, to preserve you,’
and, ‘They will carry you on their hands, so that you may not strike your foot against a stone.’”
In answer Jesus said to him: “It is said, ‘You must not put Jehovah your God to the test.’”
So the Devil, having finished all the temptation, departed from him until another convenient time.
Now Jesus returned in the power of the spirit into Galʹi·lee. And good reports about him spread throughout all the surrounding country.
Also, he began to teach in their synagogues, and he was held in honor by all.
He then went to Nazʹa·reth, where he had been brought up, and according to his custom on the Sabbath day, he entered the synagogue and stood up to read.
So the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him, and he opened the scroll and found the place where it was written:
“Jehovah’s spirit is upon me, because he anointed me to declare good news to the poor. He sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and a recovery of sight to the blind, to send the crushed ones away free,
to preach Jehovah’s acceptable year.”
With that he rolled up the scroll, handed it back to the attendant, and sat down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were intently fixed on him.
Then he began to say to them: “Today this scripture that you just heard is fulfilled.”
And they all began to give favorable witness about him and to be amazed at the gracious words coming out of his mouth, and they were saying: “This is a son of Joseph, is it not?”
At this he said to them: “No doubt you will apply this saying to me, ‘Physician, cure yourself. Do also here in your home territory the things we have heard were done in Ca·perʹna·um.’”
So he said: “Truly I tell you that no prophet is accepted in his home territory.
On one occasion when the crowd was pressing in on him and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gen·nesʹa·ret.
And he saw two boats docked at the lakeside, but the fishermen had got out of them and were washing off their nets.
Going aboard one of the boats, which was Simon’s, he asked him to pull away a bit from land. Then he sat down, and he began teaching the crowds from the boat.
When he stopped speaking, he said to Simon: “Pull out to where it is deep, and let down your nets for a catch.”
But in reply Simon said: “Instructor, we toiled all night and caught nothing, but at your word I will lower the nets.”
Well, when they did this, they caught a great number of fish. In fact, their nets began ripping apart.
So they motioned to their partners in the other boat to come and assist them, and they came and filled both boats, so that these began to sink.
Seeing this, Simon Peter fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying: “Depart from me, Lord, because I am a sinful man.”
For both he and those with him were overwhelmed with astonishment at the catch of fish they had taken,
and the same was true of both James and John, Zebʹe·dee’s sons, who were partners with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: “Stop being afraid. From now on you will be catching men alive.”
So they brought the boats back to land and abandoned everything and followed him.
On another occasion while he was in one of the cities, look! there was a man full of leprosy! When he caught sight of Jesus, he fell facedown and begged him: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
So stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to! Be made clean.” Immediately the leprosy vanished from him.
Then he gave the man orders to tell no one: “But go and show yourself to the priest, and make an offering for your cleansing, just as Moses directed, for a witness to them.”
But the news about him just kept spreading, and large crowds would gather together to listen and to be cured of their sicknesses.
However, he often went into the desolate areas to pray.
On one of those days while he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the Law who had come out of every village of Galʹi·lee and Ju·deʹa and from Jerusalem were sitting there; and Jehovah’s power was with him to do healing.
And look! men were carrying a paralyzed man on a stretcher, and they were trying to bring him in and place him before Jesus.
So not finding a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they climbed up to the roof, and they lowered him on the stretcher through the tiling, right among those in front of Jesus.
When he saw their faith, he said: “Man, your sins are forgiven.”
Then the scribes and the Pharisees started to reason, saying: “Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins except God alone?”
But Jesus, discerning their reasoning, said in answer to them: “What are you reasoning in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
But in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” he said to the paralyzed man: “I say to you, Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
Now on a sabbath he was passing through grainfields, and his disciples were plucking and eating the heads of grain, rubbing them with their hands.
At this some of the Pharisees said: “Why are you doing what is not lawful on the Sabbath?”
But in reply Jesus said to them: “Have you never read what David did when he and the men with him were hungry?
How he entered into the house of God and received the loaves of presentation and ate and gave some to the men with him, which it is not lawful for anyone to eat but for the priests only?”
Then he said to them: “The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
On another sabbath he entered the synagogue and began teaching. And a man was there whose right hand was withered.
The scribes and the Pharisees were now watching Jesus closely to see whether he would cure on the Sabbath, in order to find some way to accuse him.
He, however, knew their reasoning, so he said to the man with the withered hand: “Get up and stand in the center.” And he rose and stood there.
Then Jesus said to them: “I ask you men, Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save a life or to destroy it?”
After looking around at them all, he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” He did so, and his hand was restored.
But they flew into a senseless rage, and they began to talk over with one another what they might do to Jesus.
On one of those days he went out to the mountain to pray, and he spent the whole night in prayer to God.
And when it became day, he called his disciples to him and chose from among them , whom he also named apostles:
Simon, whom he also named Peter, Andrew his brother, James, John, Philip, Bar·tholʹo·mew,
Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Al·phaeʹus, Simon who is called “the zealous one,”
Judas the son of James, and Judas Is·carʹi·ot, who turned traitor.
And he came down with them and stood on a level place, and there was a large crowd of his disciples, and a great multitude of people from all Ju·deʹa and Jerusalem and the coastal region of Tyre and Siʹdon, who came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
Even those troubled with unclean spirits were cured.
And all the crowd were seeking to touch him, because power was going out of him and healing them all.
And he looked up at his disciples and began to say:
“Happy are you who hunger now, for you will be filled.
“Happy are you whenever men hate you, and when they exclude you and reproach you and denounce your name as wicked for the sake of the Son of man.
Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for look! your reward is great in heaven, for those are the same things their forefathers used to do to the prophets.
“But woe to you who are rich, for you are having your consolation in full.
When he had completed what he had to say to the people, he entered Ca·perʹna·um.
Now an army officer’s slave, who was dear to him, was seriously ill and about to pass away.
When he heard about Jesus, he sent some elders of the Jews to him to ask him to come and make his slave well.
They came up to Jesus and began to plead with him earnestly, saying: “He is worthy of your granting him this,
for he loves our nation and he himself built our synagogue.”
So Jesus went with them. But when he was not far from the house, the army officer had already sent friends to say to him: “Sir, do not bother, for I am not worthy to have you come under my roof.
That is why I did not consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word, and let my servant be healed.
For I too am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”
When Jesus heard these things, he was amazed at him, and he turned to the crowd following him and said: “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found so great a faith.”
And when those who had been sent returned to the house, they found the slave in good health.
Soon afterward he traveled to a city called Naʹin, and his disciples and a large crowd were traveling with him.
As he got near the gate of the city, why look! there was a dead man being carried out, the only son of his mother. Besides, she was a widow. A considerable crowd from the city was also with her.
When the Lord caught sight of her, he was moved with pity for her, and he said to her: “Stop weeping.”
With that he approached and touched the bier, and the bearers stood still. Then he said: “Young man, I say to you, get up!”
And the dead man sat up and started to speak, and Jesus gave him to his mother.
Now fear seized them all, and they began to glorify God, saying: “A great prophet has been raised up among us,” and, “God has turned his attention to his people.”
And this news concerning him spread out into all Ju·deʹa and all the surrounding country.
Now John’s disciples reported to him all these things.
So John summoned two of his disciples and sent them to the Lord to ask: “Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect a different one?”
When they came to him, the men said: “John the Baptist sent us to you to ask, ‘Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect another?’”
In that hour he cured many people of sicknesses, serious diseases, and wicked spirits, and he granted many blind people the gift of sight.
In reply he said to them: “Go and report to John what you have seen and heard: The blind are now seeing, the lame are walking, the lepers are being cleansed, the deaf are hearing, the dead are being raised up, and the poor are being told the good news.
Happy is the one who finds no cause for stumbling in me.”
When the messengers of John had gone away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed being tossed by the wind?
Shortly afterward he traveled from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God. And the Twelve were with him,
as were certain women who had been cured of wicked spirits and sicknesses: Mary who was called Magʹda·lene, from whom seven demons had come out;
Jo·anʹna the wife of Chuʹza, Herod’s man in charge; Su·sanʹna; and many other women, who were ministering to them from their belongings.
Now when a large crowd had gathered together with those who went to him from city to city, he spoke by means of an illustration:
“A sower went out to sow his seed. As he was sowing, some of them fell alongside the road and were trampled on, and the birds of heaven ate them up.
Some landed on the rock, and after sprouting, they dried up because they had no moisture.
Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns that grew up with them choked them.
But others fell on the good soil, and after sprouting, they produced  times more fruit.” As he said these things, he called out: “Let the one who has ears to listen, listen.”
But his disciples asked him what this illustration meant.
He said: “To you it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the Kingdom of God, but for the rest it is in illustrations so that, though looking, they may look in vain, and though hearing, they may not get the sense.
Now the illustration means this: The seed is the word of God.
Those alongside the road are the ones who have heard, and then the Devil comes and takes the word away from their hearts so that they may not believe and be saved.
Those on the rock are the ones who, when they hear the word, receive it with joy, but these have no root. They believe for a while, but in a season of testing, they fall away.
As for that which fell among the thorns, these are the ones who have heard, but by being carried away by anxieties, riches, and pleasures of this life, they are completely choked and bring nothing to maturity.
As for that on the fine soil, these are the ones who, after hearing the word with a fine and good heart, retain it and bear fruit with endurance.
“No one after lighting a lamp covers it with a vessel or puts it underneath a bed, but he puts it on a lampstand so that those who come in may see the light.
For there is nothing hidden that will not become manifest, nor anything carefully concealed that will never become known and not come out in the open.
Therefore, pay attention to how you listen, for whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he imagines he has will be taken away from him.”
Now his mother and brothers came to him, but they were unable to get near him because of the crowd.
So it was reported to him: “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
In reply he said to them: “My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God and do it.”
One day he and his disciples got into a boat, and he said to them: “Let us cross to the other side of the lake.” So they set sail.
But as they were sailing along, he fell asleep. And a violent windstorm descended on the lake, and their boat began to fill up with water and to be in danger.
So they went and woke him up, saying: “Instructor, Instructor, we are about to perish!” With that he got up and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they subsided, and a calm set in.
Then he called the Twelve together and gave them power and authority over all the demons and to cure diseases.
And he sent them out to preach the Kingdom of God and to heal,
and he said to them: “Carry nothing for the trip, neither staff nor food pouch nor bread nor money; neither have two garments.
But wherever you enter into a home, stay there and leave from there.
And wherever people do not receive you, on going out of that city, shake the dust off your feet for a witness against them.”
Then starting out, they went through the territory from village to village, declaring the good news and performing cures everywhere.
Now Herod the district ruler heard about everything that was happening, and he was greatly perplexed because some were saying that John had been raised up from the dead,
but others were saying that E·liʹjah had appeared, and still others that one of the ancient prophets had risen.
Herod said: “John I beheaded. Who, then, is this about whom I am hearing such things?” So he was trying to see him.
When the apostles returned, they reported to Jesus all they had done. With that he took them along and withdrew privately into a city called Beth·saʹi·da.
But the crowds, getting to know it, followed him. And he received them kindly and began to speak to them about the Kingdom of God, and he healed those needing a cure.
Then the day was coming to a close. The Twelve now came up and said to him: “Send the crowd away, so that they may go into the surrounding villages and countryside to find lodging and provisions, because out here we are in an isolated place.”
But he said to them: “You give them something to eat.” They said: “We have nothing more than five loaves and two fish, unless perhaps we ourselves go and buy food for all these people.”
There were, in fact, about , men. But he said to his disciples: “Have them sit down in groups of about  each.”
And they did so and had them all sit down.
Taking now the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven and blessed them. Then he broke them up and began giving them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
So they all ate and were satisfied, and they took up the leftovers,  baskets of fragments.
Later, while he was praying alone, the disciples came to him, and he questioned them, saying: “Who are the crowds saying that I am?”
In reply they said: “John the Baptist, but others say E·liʹjah, and still others say that one of the ancient prophets has risen.”
Then he said to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?” Peter answered: “The Christ of God.”
Then in a stern talk to them, he instructed them not to tell this to anybody,
but he said: “The Son of man must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed, and on the third day be raised up.”
Then he went on to say to all: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake day after day and keep following me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake is the one who will save it.
After these things the Lord designated  others and sent them out by twos ahead of him into every city and place where he himself was to go.
Then he said to them: “Yes, the harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.
Go! Look! I am sending you out as lambs in among wolves.
Do not carry a money bag or a food pouch or sandals, and do not greet anyone along the road.
Wherever you enter into a house, say first: ‘May this house have peace.’
And if a friend of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if there is not, it will return to you.
So stay in that house, eating and drinking the things they provide, for the worker is worthy of his wages. Do not keep transferring from house to house.
“Also, wherever you enter into a city and they receive you, eat what is set before you
and cure the sick ones in it and tell them: ‘The Kingdom of God has come near to you.’
But wherever you enter into a city and they do not receive you, go out into its main streets and say:
‘We wipe off against you even the dust that sticks to our feet from your city. Nevertheless, know this, that the Kingdom of God has come near.’
I tell you that it will be more endurable for Sodʹom in that day than for that city.
“Woe to you, Cho·raʹzin! Woe to you, Beth·saʹi·da! because if the powerful works that have taken place in you had taken place in Tyre and Siʹdon, they would long ago have repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
Consequently, it will be more endurable for Tyre and Siʹdon in the judgment than for you.
And you, Ca·perʹna·um, will you perhaps be exalted to heaven? Down to the Grave you will come!
“Whoever listens to you listens to me. And whoever disregards you disregards me also. Moreover, whoever disregards me disregards also Him who sent me.”
Then the  returned with joy, saying: “Lord, even the demons are made subject to us by the use of your name.”
At that he said to them: “I see Satan already fallen like lightning from heaven.
Look! I have given you the authority to trample underfoot serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing at all will harm you.
Nevertheless, do not rejoice because the spirits are made subject to you, but rejoice because your names have been written in the heavens.”
In that very hour he became overjoyed in the holy spirit and said: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have carefully hidden these things from wise and intellectual ones and have revealed them to young children. Yes, O Father, because this is the way you approved.
All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows who the Son is except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son and anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.”
With that he turned to the disciples and told them privately: “Happy are the eyes that see the things you are seeing.
For I say to you, many prophets and kings desired to see the things you are observing but did not see them, and to hear the things you are hearing but did not hear them.”
Now he was in a certain place praying, and when he stopped, one of his disciples said to him: “Lord, teach us how to pray, just as John also taught his disciples.”
So he said to them: “Whenever you pray, say: ‘Father, let your name be sanctified. Let your Kingdom come.
Give us each day our bread according to our daily needs.
And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is in debt to us; and do not bring us into temptation.’”
Then he said to them: “Suppose one of you has a friend and you go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves,
because one of my friends has just come to me on a journey and I have nothing to offer him.’
But that one replies from inside: ‘Stop bothering me. The door is already locked, and my young children are with me in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything.’
I tell you, even if he will not get up and give him anything because of being his friend, certainly because of his bold persistence he will get up and give him whatever he needs.
So I say to you, keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.
For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking, it will be opened.
Indeed, which father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will hand him a serpent instead of a fish?
Or if he also asks for an egg, will hand him a scorpion?
Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!”
Later he expelled a speechless demon. After the demon came out, the speechless man spoke, and the crowds were amazed.
But some of them said: “He expels the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, the ruler of the demons.”
And others, to test him, began demanding a sign out of heaven from him.
Knowing their thinking, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, and a house divided against itself falls.
In the same way, if Satan is also divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub.
If I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, by whom do your sons expel them? This is why they will be your judges.
But if it is by means of God’s finger that I expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken you.
When a strong, well-armed man guards his palace, his belongings remain secure.
But when someone stronger than he is comes against him and conquers him, that man takes away all his weapons in which he was trusting, and he divides up the things he took from him.
Whoever is not on my side is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
“When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through waterless places in search of a resting-place, and after finding none, it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I moved.’
In the meantime, when a crowd of so many thousands had gathered together that they were stepping on one another, he started by saying first to his disciples: “Watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
But there is nothing carefully concealed that will not be revealed, and nothing secret that will not become known.
Therefore, whatever you say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you whisper in private rooms will be preached from the housetops.
Moreover, I say to you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the body and after this are not able to do anything more.
But I will show you whom to fear: Fear the One who after killing has authority to throw into Ge·henʹna. Yes, I tell you, fear this One.
Five sparrows sell for two coins of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them is forgotten by God.
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Have no fear; you are worth more than many sparrows.
“I say to you, everyone who acknowledges me before men, the Son of man will also acknowledge him before the angels of God.
But whoever disowns me before men will be disowned before the angels of God.
And everyone who says a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him, but whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit will not be forgiven.
When they bring you in before public assemblies, government officials, and authorities, do not become anxious about how or what you will speak in defense or what you will say,
for the holy spirit will teach you in that very hour the things you should say.”
Then someone in the crowd said to him: “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
He said to him: “Man, who appointed me judge or arbitrator between you two?”
Then he said to them: “Keep your eyes open and guard against every sort of greed, because even when a person has an abundance, his life does not result from the things he possesses.”
With that he told them an illustration, saying: “The land of a rich man produced well.
So he began reasoning within himself, ‘What should I do now that I have nowhere to gather my crops?’
Then he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my storehouses and build bigger ones, and there I will gather all my grain and all my goods,
and I will say to myself: “You have many good things stored up for many years; take it easy, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.”’
But God said to him, ‘Unreasonable one, this night they are demanding your life from you. Who, then, is to have the things you stored up?’
So it goes with the man who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.”
Then he said to his disciples: “That is why I say to you, stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or about your bodies as to what you will wear.
For the life is worth more than food and the body more than clothing.
Consider the ravens: They neither sow seed nor reap; they have neither barn nor storehouse; yet God feeds them. Are you not worth much more than birds?
At that time some who were present reported to him about the Gal·i·leʹans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
In reply he said to them: “Do you think that those Gal·i·leʹans were worse sinners than all other Gal·i·leʹans because they have suffered these things?
No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise be destroyed.
Or those  on whom the tower in Si·loʹam fell, killing them—do you think that they had greater guilt than all other men who live in Jerusalem?
No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all be destroyed, as they were.”
Then he went on to tell this illustration: “A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it but found none.
Then he said to the vinedresser, ‘Here it is three years that I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree, but have found none. Cut it down! Why should it keep the ground useless?’
In reply he said to him, ‘Master, leave it alone for one more year until I dig around it and put on manure.
If it produces fruit in the future, well and good; but if not, then cut it down.’”
Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath.
And look! a woman was there who had had a spirit of weakness for  years; and she was bent double and was unable to straighten up at all.
When he saw her, Jesus addressed her and said: “Woman, you are released from your weakness.”
And he laid his hands on her, and instantly she straightened up and began to glorify God.
But in response the presiding officer of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus did the cure on the Sabbath, said to the crowd: “There are six days on which work ought to be done; so come and be cured on those days, and not on the Sabbath day.”
However, the Lord answered him: “Hypocrites, does not each one of you on the Sabbath untie his bull or his donkey from the stall and lead it away to give it something to drink?
Should not this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham and whom Satan held bound for  years, be released from this bondage on the Sabbath day?”
Well, when he said these things, all his opposers began to feel shame, but the entire crowd began to rejoice at all the glorious things he did.
So he went on to say: “What is the Kingdom of God like, and with what can I compare it?
It is like a mustard grain that a man took and planted in his garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of heaven nested in its branches.”
And again he said: “With what can I compare the Kingdom of God?
It is like leaven that a woman took and mixed with three large measures of flour until the whole mass was fermented.”
And he traveled from city to city and from village to village, teaching and continuing on his journey to Jerusalem.
Now a man said to him: “Lord, are those being saved few?” He said to them:
“Exert yourselves vigorously to get in through the narrow door, because many, I tell you, will seek to get in but will not be able.
On another occasion he went to eat a meal in the house of one of the leaders of the Pharisees on the Sabbath, and they were closely watching him.
And look! a man who had dropsy was in front of him.
So in response Jesus asked those versed in the Law and the Pharisees: “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath or not?”
But they kept silent. With that he took hold of the man, healed him, and sent him away.
Then he said to them: “Who of you, if his son or bull falls into a well, will not immediately pull him out on the Sabbath day?”
And they were not able to reply to this.
He then told the invited men an illustration when he noticed how they were choosing the most prominent places for themselves. He said to them:
“When you are invited by someone to a marriage feast, do not recline in the most prominent place. Perhaps someone more distinguished than you may also have been invited.
Then the one who invited you both will come and say to you, ‘Let this man have your place.’ Then you will proceed with shame to take the lowest place.
But when you are invited, go and recline in the lowest place, so that when the man who invited you comes, he will say to you, ‘Friend, go on up higher.’ Then you will have honor in front of all your fellow guests.
For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
Next he said also to the man who had invited him: “When you spread a dinner or an evening meal, do not call your friends or your brothers or your relatives or your rich neighbors. Otherwise, they might also invite you in return, and it would become a repayment to you.
But when you spread a feast, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind;
and you will be happy, because they have nothing with which to repay you. For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous ones.”
On hearing these things, one of the fellow guests said to him: “Happy is the one who dines in the Kingdom of God.”
Jesus said to him: “A man was spreading a grand evening meal, and he invited many.
He sent his slave out at the hour of the evening meal to say to the invited ones, ‘Come, because everything is now ready.’
But they all alike began to make excuses. The first said to him, ‘I bought a field and need to go out and see it; I ask you, have me excused.’
And another said, ‘I bought five yoke of cattle and am going to examine them; I ask you, have me excused.’
Still another said, ‘I just got married, and for this reason I cannot come.’
So the slave came and reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house became angry and said to his slave, ‘Go out quickly to the main streets and the alleys of the city, and bring in here the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’
In time the slave said, ‘Master, what you ordered has been done, and still there is room.’
So the master said to the slave, ‘Go out to the roads and the lanes and compel them to come in, so that my house may be filled.
For I say to you, none of those men who were invited will taste my evening meal.’”
Now all the tax collectors and the sinners kept gathering around him to hear him.
And both the Pharisees and the scribes kept muttering: “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.”
Then he told them this illustration, saying:
“What man among you with  sheep, on losing one of them, will not leave the  behind in the wilderness and go after the lost one until he finds it?
And when he has found it, he puts it on his shoulders and rejoices.
And when he gets home, he calls his friends and his neighbors together, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost.’
I tell you that in the same way, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over  righteous ones who have no need of repentance.
“Or what woman who has ten drachma coins, if she loses one of the drachmas, does not light a lamp and sweep her house and search carefully until she finds it?
And when she has found it, she calls her friends and neighbors together, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma coin that I had lost.’
In the same way, I tell you, joy arises among the angels of God over one sinner who repents.”
Then he said: “A man had two sons.
And the younger one said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of the property that should come to me.’ So he divided his belongings between them.
A few days later, the younger son gathered all his things together and traveled to a distant country and there squandered his property by living a debauched life.
When he had spent everything, a severe famine occurred throughout that country, and he fell into need.
He even went and attached himself to one of the citizens of that country, who sent him into his fields to herd swine.
And he longed to be filled with the carob pods that the swine were eating, but no one would give him anything.
“When he came to his senses, he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired men have more than enough bread, while I am dying here from hunger!
I will get up and travel to my father and say to him: “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
I am no longer worthy of being called your son. Make me as one of your hired men.”’
So he got up and went to his father. While he was still a long way off, his father caught sight of him and was moved with pity, and he ran and embraced him and tenderly kissed him.
Then the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy of being called your son.’
But the father said to his slaves, ‘Quick! bring out a robe, the best one, and clothe him with it, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet.
Also bring the fattened calf, slaughter it, and let us eat and celebrate,
for this son of mine was dead but has come to life again; he was lost and has been found.’ And they started to enjoy themselves.
Then he also said to the disciples: “A rich man had a steward who was accused of handling his goods wastefully.
So he called him and said, ‘What is this I hear about you? Hand in the account of your stewardship, for you can no longer manage the house.’
Then the steward said to himself, ‘What am I to do, seeing that my master is taking the stewardship away from me? I am not strong enough to dig, and I am ashamed to beg.
Ah! I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from the stewardship, people will welcome me into their homes.’
And calling to him each one of his master’s debtors, he said to the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’
He replied, ‘A hundred measures of olive oil.’ He said to him, ‘Take back your written agreement and sit down and quickly write .’
Next, he said to another one, ‘Now you, how much do you owe?’ He said, ‘A hundred large measures of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Take back your written agreement and write .’
And his master commended the steward, though unrighteous, because he acted with practical wisdom; for the sons of this system of things are wiser in a practical way toward their own generation than the sons of the light are.
“Also, I say to you: Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches, so that when such fail, they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places.
The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much, and the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also in much.
Therefore, if you have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with the unrighteous riches, who will entrust you with what is true?
And if you have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with what belongs to another, who will give you something for yourselves?
No servant can be a slave to two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot be slaves to God and to Riches.”
Now the Pharisees, who were money lovers, were listening to all these things, and they began to sneer at him.
So he said to them: “You are those who declare yourselves righteous before men, but God knows your hearts. For what is considered exalted by men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.
“The Law and the Prophets were until John. From then on, the Kingdom of God is being declared as good news, and every sort of person is pressing forward toward it.
Indeed, it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one stroke of a letter of the Law to go unfulfilled.
“Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and whoever marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery.
“There was a rich man who used to dress in purple and linen, enjoying himself day after day with magnificence.
But a beggar named Lazʹa·rus used to be put at his gate, covered with ulcers
and desiring to be filled with the things dropping from the table of the rich man. Yes, even the dogs would come and lick his ulcers.
Now in the course of time, the beggar died and was carried off by the angels to Abraham’s side.
And in the Grave he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and he saw Abraham from afar and Lazʹa·rus by his side.
So he called and said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazʹa·rus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am in anguish in this blazing fire.’
Then he said to his disciples: “It is unavoidable that causes for stumbling should come. Nevertheless, woe to the one through whom they come!
It would be more advantageous for him if a millstone were hung from his neck and he were thrown into the sea than for him to stumble one of these little ones.
Pay attention to yourselves. If your brother commits a sin, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him.
Even if he sins seven times a day against you and he comes back to you seven times, saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”
Now the apostles said to the Lord: “Give us more faith.”
Then the Lord said: “If you had faith the size of a mustard grain, you would say to this black mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea!’ and it would obey you.
“Which one of you who has a slave plowing or shepherding would say to him when he comes in from the field, ‘Come here at once and dine at the table’?
Rather, will he not say to him, ‘Get something ready for me to have my evening meal, and put on an apron and serve me until I finish eating and drinking, and afterward you can eat and drink’?
He will not feel gratitude to the slave because he did what was assigned, will he?
Likewise, when you have done all the things assigned to you, say: ‘We are good-for-nothing slaves. What we have done is what we ought to have done.’”
While he was going to Jerusalem, he was passing between Sa·marʹi·a and Galʹi·lee.
And as he was entering a village, ten men with leprosy met him, but they stood at a distance.
And they raised their voices and said: “Jesus, Instructor, have mercy on us!”
When he saw them, he said to them: “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” Then as they were going off, they were cleansed.
One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
And he fell facedown at Jesus’ feet, thanking him. Furthermore, he was a Sa·marʹi·tan.
In reply Jesus said: “All ten were cleansed, were they not? Where, then, are the other nine?
Did no one else turn back to give glory to God except this man of another nation?”
Then he said to him: “Get up and be on your way; your faith has made you well.”
On being asked by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God was coming, he answered them: “The Kingdom of God is not coming with striking observableness;
nor will people say, ‘See here!’ or, ‘There!’ For look! the Kingdom of God is in your midst.”
Then he said to the disciples: “Days will come when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, but you will not see it.
And people will say to you, ‘See there!’ or, ‘See here!’ Do not go out or chase after them.
For just as lightning flashes from one part of heaven to another part of heaven, so the Son of man will be in his day.
Then he went on to tell them an illustration about the need for them always to pray and not to give up,
saying: “In a certain city there was a judge who had no fear of God and no respect for man.
There was also a widow in that city who kept going to him and saying, ‘See that I get justice from my legal opponent.’
Well, for a while he was unwilling, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Although I do not fear God or respect any man,
because this widow keeps making me trouble, I will see that she gets justice so that she will not keep coming and wearing me out with her demand.’”
Then the Lord said: “Hear what the judge, although unrighteous, said!
Certainly, then, will not God cause justice to be done for his chosen ones who cry out to him day and night, while he is patient toward them?
I tell you, he will cause justice to be done to them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man arrives, will he really find this faith on the earth?”
He also told this illustration to some who trusted in their own righteousness and who considered others as nothing:
“Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
The Pharisee stood and began to pray these things to himself, ‘O God, I thank you that I am not like everyone else—extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
I fast twice a week; I give the tenth of all things I acquire.’
But the tax collector, standing at a distance, was not willing even to raise his eyes heavenward but kept beating his chest, saying, ‘O God, be gracious to me, a sinner.’
I tell you, this man went down to his home and was proved more righteous than that Pharisee. Because everyone who exalts himself will be humiliated, but whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
Now people were also bringing him their infants for him to touch them, but on seeing this, the disciples began to reprimand them.
However, Jesus called the infants to him, saying: “Let the young children come to me, and do not try to stop them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such ones.
Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a young child will by no means enter into it.”
And one of the rulers questioned him, saying: “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit everlasting life?”
Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good except one, God.
You know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not bear false witness, honor your father and your mother.’”
Then he said: “All of these I have kept from youth on.”
After hearing that, Jesus said to him, “There is still one thing lacking about you: Sell all the things you have and distribute the proceeds to the poor, and you will have treasure in the heavens; and come be my follower.”
When he heard this, he became deeply grieved, for he was very rich.
Jesus looked at him and said: “How difficult it will be for those having money to make their way into the Kingdom of God!
He then entered Jerʹi·cho and was passing through.
Now a man named Zac·chaeʹus was there; he was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
Well, he was trying to see who this Jesus was, but he could not see because of the crowd, since he was short.
So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see him, for he was about to pass that way.
Now when Jesus got to the place, he looked up and said to him: “Zac·chaeʹus, hurry and get down, for today I must stay in your house.”
With that he hurried down and joyfully welcomed him as a guest.
When they saw this, they were all muttering: “He went as a guest to the house of a man who is a sinner.”
But Zac·chaeʹus stood up and said to the Lord: “Look! The half of my belongings, Lord, I am giving to the poor, and whatever I extorted from anyone, I am restoring four times over.”
At this Jesus said to him: “Today salvation has come to this house, because he too is a son of Abraham.
For the Son of man came to seek and to save what was lost.”
While they were listening to these things, he told another illustration, because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the Kingdom of God was going to appear instantly.
So he said: “A man of noble birth traveled to a distant land to secure kingly power for himself and to return.
Calling ten of his slaves, he gave them ten miʹnas and told them, ‘Do business with these until I come.’
But his citizens hated him and sent out a body of ambassadors after him to say, ‘We do not want this man to become king over us.’
“When he eventually got back after having secured the kingly power, he summoned the slaves to whom he had given the money, in order to ascertain what they had gained by their business activity.
So the first one came forward and said, ‘Lord, your miʹna gained ten miʹnas.’
He said to him, ‘Well done, good slave! Because in a very small matter you have proved yourself faithful, hold authority over ten cities.’
Now the second came, saying, ‘Your miʹna, Lord, made five miʹnas.’
He said to this one as well, ‘You too be in charge of five cities.’
But another one came, saying, ‘Lord, here is your miʹna that I kept hidden away in a cloth.
You see, I was in fear of you, because you are a harsh man; you take what you did not deposit, and you reap what you did not sow.’
He said to him, ‘By your own words I judge you, wicked slave. You knew, did you, that I am a harsh man, taking what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow?
So why did you not put my money in a bank? Then on my coming, I would have collected it with interest.’
“With that he said to those standing by, ‘Take the miʹna from him and give it to the one who has the ten miʹnas.’
On one of the days while he was teaching the people in the temple and declaring the good news, the chief priests and the scribes with the elders came
and said to him: “Tell us, by what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority?”
He replied to them: “I will also ask you a question, and you tell me:
Was the baptism of John from heaven or from men?”
Then they drew conclusions among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’
But if we say, ‘From men,’ the people one and all will stone us, for they are convinced that John was a prophet.”
So they replied that they did not know its source.
Jesus said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.”
Then he began to tell the people this illustration: “A man planted a vineyard and leased it to cultivators, and he traveled abroad for a considerable time.
In due season he sent a slave to the cultivators so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. The cultivators, however, sent him away empty-handed, after beating him.
But again he sent another slave. That one also they beat and humiliated and sent away empty-handed.
Yet again he sent a third; this one also they wounded and threw out.
At this the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What should I do? I will send my son, the beloved. They will likely respect this one.’
When the cultivators caught sight of him, they reasoned with one another, saying, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him so that the inheritance may become ours.’
So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What, then, will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
He will come and kill these cultivators and will give the vineyard to others.”
But he looked straight at them and said: “What, then, does this mean where it is written: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone’?
Everyone falling on that stone will be shattered. As for anyone on whom it falls, it will crush him.”
The scribes and the chief priests then sought to get their hands on him in that very hour, but they feared the people, for they realized that he told this illustration with them in mind.
And after observing him closely, they sent men whom they had secretly hired to pretend that they were righteous in order to catch him in his speech, so as to turn him over to the government and to the authority of the governor.
And they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, we know you speak and teach correctly and show no partiality, but you teach the way of God in line with truth:
Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not?”
But he detected their cunning and said to them:
“Show me a de·narʹi·us. Whose image and inscription does it have?” They said: “Caesar’s.”
Now as he looked up, he saw the rich dropping their gifts into the treasury chests.
Then he saw a needy widow drop in two small coins of very little value,
and he said: “Truly I say to you that this poor widow put in more than they all did.
For all of these put in gifts out of their surplus, but she, out of her want, put in all the means of living she had.”
Later, when some were speaking about the temple, how it was adorned with fine stones and dedicated things,
he said: “As for these things that you now see, the days will come when not a stone will be left upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
Then they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, when will these things actually be, and what will be the sign when these things are to occur?”
He said: “Look out that you are not misled, for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The due time is near.’ Do not go after them.
Furthermore, when you hear of wars and disturbances, do not be terrified. For these things must take place first, but the end will not occur immediately.”
Then he said to them: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
There will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another food shortages and pestilences; and there will be fearful sights and from heaven great signs.
“But before all these things happen, people will lay their hands on you and persecute you, handing you over to the synagogues and prisons. You will be brought before kings and governors for the sake of my name.
It will result in your giving a witness.
Therefore, resolve in your hearts not to rehearse beforehand how to make your defense,
for I will give you words and wisdom that all your opposers together will not be able to resist or dispute.
Moreover, you will be handed over even by parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and they will put some of you to death,
and you will be hated by all people because of my name.
But not even a hair of your heads will perish.
By your endurance you will preserve your lives.
“However, when you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, then know that the desolating of her has drawn near.
Then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains, let those in the midst of her leave, and let those in the countryside not enter into her,
because these are days for meting out justice in order that all the things written may be fulfilled.
Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days! For there will be great distress on the land and wrath against this people.
And they will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be trampled on by the nations until the appointed times of the nations are fulfilled.
Now the Festival of the Unleavened Bread, which is called Passover, was getting near.
And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for an effective way to get rid of him, because they were afraid of the people.
Then Satan entered into Judas, the one called Is·carʹi·ot, who was numbered among the Twelve,
and he went off and talked with the chief priests and temple captains about how to betray him to them.
They were delighted at this and agreed to give him silver money.
So he consented and began looking for a good opportunity to betray him to them without a crowd around.
The day of the Unleavened Bread now arrived, on which the Passover sacrifice must be offered;
so Jesus sent Peter and John, saying: “Go and get the Passover ready for us to eat.”
They said to him: “Where do you want us to get it ready?”
He said to them: “Look! When you enter into the city, a man carrying an earthenware water jar will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters.
And say to the landlord of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you: “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’
And that man will show you a large, furnished upper room. Get it ready there.”
So they left and found it just as he had told them, and they prepared for the Passover.
So when the hour came, he reclined at the table along with the apostles.
And he said to them: “I have greatly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer;
for I tell you, I will not eat it again until it is fulfilled in the Kingdom of God.”
And accepting a cup, he gave thanks and said: “Take this and pass it from one to the other among yourselves,
for I tell you, from now on, I will not drink again from the product of the vine until the Kingdom of God comes.”
Also, he took a loaf, gave thanks, broke it, and gave it to them, saying: “This means my body, which is to be given in your behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”
Also, he did the same with the cup after they had the evening meal, saying: “This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood, which is to be poured out in your behalf.
“But look! the hand of my betrayer is with me at the table.
For, indeed, the Son of man is going his way according to what has been determined; all the same, woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!”
So they began to discuss among themselves which one of them could really be about to do this.
However, there also arose a heated dispute among them over which one of them was considered to be the greatest.
So the multitude got up, one and all, and led him to Pilate.
Then they began to accuse him, saying: “We found this man subverting our nation, forbidding the paying of taxes to Caesar, and saying he himself is Christ a king.”
Now Pilate asked him the question: “Are you the King of the Jews?” In answer he said: “You yourself are saying it.”
Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds: “I find no crime in this man.”
But they insisted, saying: “He stirs up the people by teaching throughout all Ju·deʹa, starting from Galʹi·lee even to here.”
On hearing that, Pilate asked whether the man was a Gal·i·leʹan.
After ascertaining that he was under the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him on to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem in those days.
When Herod saw Jesus, he rejoiced greatly. For a considerable time he had been wanting to see Jesus because he had heard much about him, and he was hoping to see some sign performed by him.
So he began to question him at length, but he gave him no answer.
However, the chief priests and the scribes kept standing up and vehemently accusing him.
Then Herod together with his soldiers treated him with contempt, and he mocked him by clothing him with a splendid garment and then sent him back to Pilate.
Herod and Pilate became friends with each other on that very day, for before that they had been at enmity with each other.
Pilate then called together the chief priests, the rulers, and the people
and said to them: “You brought this man to me as one inciting the people to revolt. Now look! I examined him in front of you but found in this man no grounds for the charges you are bringing against him.
In fact, neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us, and look! he has done nothing deserving of death.
I will therefore punish him and release him.”
——
But the whole crowd shouted out: “Do away with this man, and release Bar·abʹbas to us!”
(This man had been thrown into prison for sedition that had occurred in the city and for murder.)
Again Pilate called out to them, because he wanted to release Jesus.
Then they began to yell, saying: “To the stake with him! To the stake with him!”
The third time he said to them: “Why? What bad thing did this man do? I found in him nothing deserving of death; I will therefore punish him and release him.”
At this they became insistent, demanding with loud voices that he be executed, and their voices prevailed.
So Pilate made the decision that their demand be met.
But on the first day of the week, they came very early to the tomb, bringing the spices they had prepared.
But they found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
and when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
While they were perplexed about this, look! two men in shining garments stood by them.
The women became frightened and kept their faces turned toward the ground, so the men said to them: “Why are you looking for the living one among the dead?
He is not here, but has been raised up. Recall how he spoke to you while he was yet in Galʹi·lee,
saying that the Son of man must be handed over to sinful men and be executed on the stake and on the third day rise.”
Then they remembered his words,
and they returned from the tomb and reported all these things to the Eleven and to all the rest.
They were Mary Magʹda·lene, Jo·anʹna, and Mary the mother of James. Also, the rest of the women with them were telling these things to the apostles.
However, these sayings seemed like nonsense to them, and they would not believe the women.
But Peter got up and ran to the tomb, and stooping forward, he saw only the linen cloths. So he went off, wondering to himself what had occurred.
But look! on that very day, two of them were traveling to a village named Em·maʹus, about seven miles from Jerusalem,
and they were conversing with each other about all these things that had happened.
Now as they were conversing and discussing these things, Jesus himself approached and began walking with them,
but their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
He said to them: “What are these matters that you are debating between yourselves as you walk along?” And they stood still, looking sad.
In answer the one named Cleʹo·pas said to him: “Are you a stranger dwelling alone in Jerusalem and do not know the things that have occurred there during these days?”
He asked them: “What things?” They said to him: “The things concerning Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ, who proved to be a prophet powerful in deed and word before God and all the people;
and how our chief priests and rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they nailed him to the stake.
But we were hoping that this man was the one who was going to deliver Israel. Yes, and besides all these things, this is the third day since these things occurred.
Moreover, some women from among us also astonished us, for they went early to the tomb
and when they did not find his body, they came saying that they had also seen a supernatural sight of angels, who said he is alive.
Then some of those who were with us went off to the tomb, and they found it just as the women had said, but they did not see him.”
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was a god.
This one was in the beginning with God.
All things came into existence through him, and apart from him not even one thing came into existence.
by means of him was life, and the life was the light of men.
And the light is shining in the darkness, but the darkness has not overpowered it.
There came a man who was sent as a representative of God; his name was John.
This man came as a witness, in order to bear witness about the light, so that people of all sorts might believe through him.
He was not that light, but he was meant to bear witness about that light.
The true light that gives light to every sort of man was about to come into the world.
He was in the world, and the world came into existence through him, but the world did not know him.
He came to his own home, but his own people did not accept him.
However, to all who did receive him, he gave authority to become God’s children, because they were exercising faith in his name.
And they were born, not from blood or from a fleshly will or from man’s will, but from God.
So the Word became flesh and resided among us, and we had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father; and he was full of divine favor and truth.
(John bore witness about him, yes, he cried out: “This was the one of whom I said, ‘The one coming behind me has advanced in front of me, for he existed before me.’”)
For we all received from his fullness, even undeserved kindness upon undeserved kindness.
Because the Law was given through Moses, the undeserved kindness and the truth came to be through Jesus Christ.
No man has seen God at any time; the only-begotten god who is at the Father’s side is the one who has explained Him.
This is the witness John gave when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him: “Who are you?”
And he admitted it and did not deny it, saying: “I am not the Christ.”
And they asked him: “What, then? Are you E·liʹjah?” He replied: “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered: “No!”
And on the third day a marriage feast took place in Caʹna of Galʹi·lee, and the mother of Jesus was there.
Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the marriage feast.
When the wine ran short, the mother of Jesus said to him: “They have no wine.”
But Jesus said to her: “Woman, why is that of concern to me and to you? My hour has not yet come.”
His mother said to those serving: “Do whatever he tells you.”
Now there were six stone water jars sitting there as required by the purification rules of the Jews, each able to hold two or three liquid measures.
Jesus said to them: “Fill the jars with water.” So they filled them to the brim.
Then he said to them: “Now draw some out and take it to the director of the feast.” So they took it.
When the director of the feast tasted the water that had now been turned into wine, not knowing where it came from (although the servants who had drawn out the water knew), the director of the feast called the bridegroom
and said to him: “Everyone else puts out the fine wine first, and when people are intoxicated, the inferior. You have saved the fine wine until now.”
Jesus did this in Caʹna of Galʹi·lee as the beginning of his signs, and he made his glory manifest, and his disciples put their faith in him.
After this he and his mother and his brothers and his disciples went down to Ca·perʹna·um, but they did not stay there many days.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
He found in the temple those selling cattle and sheep and doves, and the money brokers in their seats.
So after making a whip of ropes, he drove all those with the sheep and cattle out of the temple, and he poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
And he said to those selling the doves: “Take these things away from here! Stop making the house of my Father a house of commerce!”
His disciples recalled that it is written: “The zeal for your house will consume me.”
Therefore, in response the Jews said to him: “What sign can you show us, since you are doing these things?”
Jesus replied to them: “Tear down this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”
The Jews then said: “This temple was built in  years, and will you raise it up in three days?”
But he was talking about the temple of his body.
There was a man of the Pharisees named Nic·o·deʹmus, a ruler of the Jews.
This one came to him in the night and said to him: “Rabbi, we know that you have come from God as a teacher, for no one can perform these signs that you perform unless God is with him.”
In response Jesus said to him: “Most truly I say to you, unless anyone is born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.”
Nic·o·deʹmus said to him: “How can a man be born when he is old? He cannot enter into the womb of his mother a second time and be born, can he?”
Jesus answered: “Most truly I say to you, unless anyone is born from water and spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
What has been born from the flesh is flesh, and what has been born from the spirit is spirit.
Do not be amazed because I told you: You people must be born again.
The wind blows where it wants to, and you hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is with everyone who has been born from the spirit.”
In answer Nic·o·deʹmus said to him: “How can these things be?”
Jesus replied: “Are you a teacher of Israel and yet do not know these things?
Most truly I say to you, what we know we speak, and what we have seen we bear witness to, but you do not receive the witness we give.
If I have told you earthly things and you still do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things?
Moreover, no man has ascended into heaven but the one who descended from heaven, the Son of man.
And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so the Son of man must be lifted up,
so that everyone believing in him may have everlasting life.
“For God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.
For God did not send his Son into the world for him to judge the world, but for the world to be saved through him.
Whoever exercises faith in him is not to be judged. Whoever does not exercise faith has been judged already, because he has not exercised faith in the name of the only-begotten Son of God.
Now this is the basis for judgment: that the light has come into the world, but men have loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works were wicked.
For whoever practices vile things hates the light and does not come to the light, so that his works may not be reproved.
But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that his works may be made manifest as having been done in harmony with God.”
When the Lord became aware that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John—
although Jesus himself did no baptizing but his disciples did—
he left Ju·deʹa and departed again for Galʹi·lee.
But it was necessary for him to go through Sa·marʹi·a.
So he came to a city of Sa·marʹi·a called Syʹchar, near the field that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
In fact, Jacob’s well was there. Now Jesus, tired out as he was from the journey, was sitting at the well. It was about the sixth hour.
A woman of Sa·marʹi·a came to draw water. Jesus said to her: “Give me a drink.”
(For his disciples had gone off into the city to buy food.)
So the Sa·marʹi·tan woman said to him: “How is it that you, despite being a Jew, ask me for a drink even though I am a Sa·marʹi·tan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Sa·marʹi·tans.)
In answer Jesus said to her: “If you had known of the free gift of God and who it is who says to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.”
She said to him: “Sir, you do not even have a bucket for drawing water, and the well is deep. From what source, then, do you have this living water?
You are not greater than our forefather Jacob, who gave us the well and who together with his sons and his cattle drank out of it, are you?”
In answer Jesus said to her: “Everyone drinking from this water will get thirsty again.
Whoever drinks from the water that I will give him will never get thirsty at all, but the water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water bubbling up to impart everlasting life.”
The woman said to him: “Sir, give me this water, so that I may neither thirst nor keep coming over to this place to draw water.”
He said to her: “Go, call your husband and come to this place.”
The woman replied: “I do not have a husband.” Jesus said to her: “You are right in saying, ‘I do not have a husband.’
For you have had five husbands, and the man you now have is not your husband. This you have said truthfully.”
The woman said to him: “Sir, I see that you are a prophet.
Our forefathers worshipped on this mountain, but you people say that in Jerusalem is the place where people must worship.”
Jesus said to her: “Believe me, woman, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father.
After this there was a festival of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now in Jerusalem at the Sheep Gate is a pool called in Hebrew Beth·zaʹtha, with five colonnades.
Within these a multitude of the sick, blind, lame, and those with withered limbs were lying down.
——
But one man was there who had been sick for  years.
Seeing this man lying there and being aware that he had already been sick for a long time, Jesus said to him: “Do you want to get well?”
The sick man answered him: “Sir, I do not have anyone to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I am on my way, another steps down ahead of me.”
Jesus said to him: “Get up! Pick up your mat and walk.”
And the man immediately got well, and he picked up his mat and began to walk.
So the Jews began to say to the cured man: “It is the Sabbath, and it is not lawful for you to carry the mat.”
But he answered them: “The same one who made me well said to me, ‘Pick up your mat and walk.’”
They asked him: “Who is the man who told you, ‘Pick it up and walk’?”
But the healed man did not know who he was, for Jesus had slipped away into the crowd that was there.
After this Jesus found him in the temple and said to him: “See, you have become well. Do not sin anymore, so that something worse does not happen to you.”
The man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
For this reason the Jews were persecuting Jesus, because he was doing these things during the Sabbath.
But he answered them: “My Father has kept working until now, and I keep working.”
This is why the Jews began seeking all the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the Sabbath but he was also calling God his own Father, making himself equal to God.
Therefore, in response Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to you, the Son cannot do a single thing of his own initiative, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever things that One does, these things the Son does also in like manner.
For the Father has affection for the Son and shows him all the things he himself does, and he will show him works greater than these, so that you may marvel.
For just as the Father raises the dead up and makes them alive, so the Son also makes alive whomever he wants to.
After this Jesus set out across the Sea of Galʹi·lee, or Ti·beʹri·as.
And a large crowd kept following him, because they were observing the miraculous signs he was performing in healing the sick.
So Jesus went up on a mountain and sat down there with his disciples.
Now the Passover, the festival of the Jews, was near.
When Jesus raised his eyes and saw that a large crowd was coming to him, he said to Philip: “Where will we buy bread for these people to eat?”
However, he was saying this to test him, for he knew what he was about to do.
Philip answered him: “Two hundred de·narʹi·i worth of bread is not enough for each of them to get even a little.”
One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him:
“Here is a little boy who has five barley loaves and two small fish. But what are these among so many?”
Jesus said: “Have the people sit down.” As there was a lot of grass in that place, the men sat down there, about , in number.
Jesus took the bread, and after giving thanks, he distributed it to those who were sitting there; he did likewise with the small fish, and they had as much as they wanted.
But when they had eaten their fill, he said to his disciples: “Gather together the fragments left over, so that nothing is wasted.”
So they gathered them together and filled  baskets with fragments left over by those who had eaten from the five barley loaves.
When the people saw the sign he performed, they began to say: “This really is the Prophet who was to come into the world.”
Then Jesus, knowing that they were about to come and seize him to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain all alone.
When evening fell, his disciples went down to the sea,
and boarding a boat, they set out across the sea for Ca·perʹna·um. By now it had grown dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them.
Also, the sea was getting rough because a strong wind was blowing.
However, when they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus walking on the sea and getting near the boat, and they became fearful.
But he said to them: “It is I; do not be afraid!”
Then they were willing to take him into the boat, and right away the boat arrived at the land to which they had been heading.
After this Jesus continued traveling about in Galʹi·lee, for he did not want to do so in Ju·deʹa because the Jews were seeking to kill him.
However, the Jewish Festival of Tabernacles was near.
So his brothers said to him: “Leave here and go into Ju·deʹa, so that your disciples may also see the works you are doing.
For no one does anything in secret when he seeks to be known publicly. If you are doing these things, show yourself to the world.”
His brothers were, in fact, not exercising faith in him.
So Jesus said to them: “My time has not yet arrived, but your time is always at hand.
The world has no reason to hate you, but it hates me, because I bear witness about it that its works are wicked.
You go up to the festival; I am not yet going up to this festival, because my time has not yet fully come.”
So after he told them these things, he remained in Galʹi·lee.
But when his brothers had gone up to the festival, then he also went up, not openly but in secret.
So the Jews began looking for him at the festival and saying: “Where is that man?”
And there was a lot of subdued talk about him among the crowds. Some would say: “He is a good man.” Others would say: “He is not. He misleads the crowd.”
Of course, no one would speak about him publicly because of fear of the Jews.
When the festival was half over, Jesus went up into the temple and began teaching.
And the Jews were astonished, saying: “How does this man have such a knowledge of the Scriptures when he has not studied at the schools?”
Jesus, in turn, answered them and said: “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him who sent me.
If anyone desires to do His will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or I speak of my own originality.
Whoever speaks of his own originality is seeking his own glory; but whoever seeks the glory of the one who sent him, this one is true and there is no unrighteousness in him.
Moses gave you the Law, did he not? But not one of you obeys the Law. Why are you seeking to kill me?”
The crowd answered: “You have a demon. Who is seeking to kill you?”
In answer Jesus said to them: “One deed I performed, and you are all surprised.
Then Jesus spoke again to them, saying: “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will by no means walk in darkness, but will possess the light of life.”
So the Pharisees said to him: “You bear witness about yourself; your witness is not true.”
In answer Jesus said to them: “Even if I do bear witness about myself, my witness is true, because I know where I came from and where I am going. But you do not know where I came from and where I am going.
You judge according to the flesh; I do not judge any man at all.
And yet even if I do judge, my judgment is truthful, because I am not alone, but the Father who sent me is with me.
Also, in your own Law it is written: ‘The witness of two men is true.’
I am one who bears witness about myself, and the Father who sent me bears witness about me.”
Then they said to him: “Where is your Father?” Jesus answered: “You know neither me nor my Father. If you did know me, you would know my Father also.”
He spoke these words in the treasury as he was teaching in the temple. But no one seized him, for his hour had not yet come.
So he said to them again: “I am going away, and you will look for me, and yet you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come.”
As he was passing along, he saw a man who had been blind from birth.
And his disciples asked him: “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, so that he was born blind?”
Jesus answered: “Neither this man sinned nor his parents, but it was so that the works of God might be made manifest in his case.
We must do the works of the One who sent me while it is day; the night is coming when no man can work.
As long as I am in the world, I am the world’s light.”
After he said these things, he spat on the ground and made a paste with the saliva, and he smeared the paste on the man’s eyes
and said to him: “Go wash in the pool of Si·loʹam” (which is translated “Sent Forth”). And he went and washed, and came back seeing.
Then the neighbors and those who formerly used to see that he was a beggar began to say: “This is the man who used to sit and beg, is it not?”
Some were saying: “This is he.” Others were saying: “No, but he looks like him.” The man kept saying: “I am he.”
So they asked him: “How, then, were your eyes opened?”
He answered: “The man called Jesus made a paste and smeared it on my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to Si·loʹam and wash.’ So I went and washed and gained sight.”
At this they said to him: “Where is that man?” He said: “I do not know.”
They led the formerly blind man to the Pharisees.
Incidentally, the day that Jesus made the paste and opened his eyes was the Sabbath.
So this time the Pharisees also began asking the man how he gained sight. He said to them: “He put a paste on my eyes, and I washed, and I can see.”
Some of the Pharisees then began to say: “This is not a man from God, for he does not observe the Sabbath.” Others said: “How can a man who is a sinner perform signs of that sort?” So there was a division among them.
And again they said to the blind man: “What do you say about him, since it was your eyes that he opened?” The man said: “He is a prophet.”
However, the Jews did not believe that he had been blind and had gained sight, until they called the parents of the man who could now see.
And they asked them: “Is this your son who you say was born blind? How, then, does he now see?”
His parents answered: “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind.
But how it is that he now sees, we do not know; or who opened his eyes, we do not know. Ask him. He is of age. He must speak for himself.”
“Most truly I say to you, the one who does not enter into the sheepfold through the door but climbs in by another way, that one is a thief and a plunderer.
But the one who enters through the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
The doorkeeper opens to this one, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
When he has brought all his own out, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.
They will by no means follow a stranger but will flee from him, because they do not know the voice of strangers.”
Jesus spoke this comparison to them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them.
So Jesus said again: “Most truly I say to you, I am the door for the sheep.
All those who have come in place of me are thieves and plunderers; but the sheep have not listened to them.
I am the door; whoever enters through me will be saved, and that one will go in and out and find pasturage.
The thief does not come unless it is to steal and slay and destroy. I have come that they may have life and have it in abundance.
I am the fine shepherd; the fine shepherd surrenders his life in behalf of the sheep.
The hired man, who is not a shepherd and to whom the sheep do not belong, sees the wolf coming and abandons the sheep and flees—and the wolf snatches them and scatters them—
because he is a hired man and does not care for the sheep.
I am the fine shepherd. I know my sheep and my sheep know me,
just as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I surrender my life in behalf of the sheep.
“And I have other sheep, which are not of this fold; those too I must bring in, and they will listen to my voice, and they will become one flock, one shepherd.
This is why the Father loves me, because I surrender my life, so that I may receive it again.
No man takes it away from me, but I surrender it of my own initiative. I have authority to surrender it, and I have authority to receive it again. This commandment I received from my Father.”
A division again resulted among the Jews because of these words.
Many of them were saying: “He has a demon and is out of his mind. Why do you listen to him?”
Others said: “These are not the sayings of a demonized man. A demon cannot open blind people’s eyes, can it?”
Now a man named Lazʹa·rus was sick; he was from Bethʹa·ny, the village of Mary and her sister Martha.
This was the Mary who poured perfumed oil on the Lord and wiped his feet dry with her hair; it was her brother Lazʹa·rus who was sick.
So his sisters sent a message to him, saying: “Lord, see! the one you have affection for is sick.”
But when Jesus heard it, he said: “This sickness is not meant to end in death, but is for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”
Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazʹa·rus.
However, when he heard that Lazʹa·rus was sick, he actually remained in the place where he was for two more days.
Then after this he said to the disciples: “Let us go into Ju·deʹa again.”
The disciples said to him: “Rabbi, just lately the Ju·deʹans were seeking to stone you, and are you going there again?”
Jesus answered: “There are  hours of daylight, are there not? If anyone walks in daylight, he does not stumble into anything, because he sees the light of this world.
But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.”
After he said these things, he added: “Lazʹa·rus our friend has fallen asleep, but I am traveling there to awaken him.”
The disciples then said to him: “Lord, if he is sleeping, he will get well.”
Jesus, however, had spoken about his death. But they imagined he was speaking about taking rest in sleep.
Then Jesus said to them plainly: “Lazʹa·rus has died,
and I rejoice for your sake that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”
So Thomas, who was called the Twin, said to his fellow disciples: “Let us also go, so that we may die with him.”
When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazʹa·rus had already been in the tomb for four days.
Now Bethʹa·ny was near Jerusalem, about two miles away.
And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to console them concerning their brother.
When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him; but Mary kept sitting at home.
Martha then said to Jesus: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
Six days before the Passover, Jesus arrived at Bethʹa·ny, where Lazʹa·rus was, whom Jesus had raised up from the dead.
So they spread an evening meal for him there, and Martha was serving them, but Lazʹa·rus was one of those dining with him.
Then Mary took a pound of perfumed oil, genuine nard, very costly, and she poured it on the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet dry with her hair. The house became filled with the scent of the perfumed oil.
But Judas Is·carʹi·ot, one of his disciples, who was about to betray him, said:
“Why was this perfumed oil not sold for  de·narʹi·i and given to the poor?”
He said this, though, not because he was concerned about the poor, but because he was a thief and had the money box and used to steal the money put in it.
Then Jesus said: “Let her alone, so that she may keep this observance in view of the day of my burial.
For you always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.”
Meanwhile, a large crowd of Jews got to know that he was there, and they came not only because of Jesus but also to see Lazʹa·rus, whom he had raised up from the dead.
The chief priests now conspired to kill Lazʹa·rus also,
since it was because of him that many of the Jews were going there and putting faith in Jesus.
The next day the large crowd that had come to the festival heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem.
So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, and they began to shout: “Save, we pray you! Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name, the King of Israel!”
When Jesus found a young donkey, he sat on it, just as it is written:
“Have no fear, daughter of Zion. Look! Your king is coming, seated on a donkey’s colt.”
These things his disciples did not understand at first, but when Jesus was glorified, they recalled that these things were written about him and that they did these things to him.
Now the crowd that was with him when he called Lazʹa·rus out of the tomb and raised him up from the dead kept bearing witness.
This is also why the crowd went to meet him, because they heard he had performed this sign.
So the Pharisees said among themselves: “You see that you are not getting anywhere. Look! The whole world has gone after him.”
Now there were some Greeks among those who had come to worship at the festival.
So these approached Philip, who was from Beth·saʹi·da of Galʹi·lee, and they began to request him, saying: “Sir, we want to see Jesus.”
Now because he knew before the festival of the Passover that his hour had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father, Jesus, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end.
The evening meal was going on, and the Devil had already put it into the heart of Judas Is·carʹi·ot, the son of Simon, to betray him.
So Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands and that he came from God and was going to God,
got up from the evening meal and laid aside his outer garments. And taking a towel, he wrapped it around his waist.
After that he put water into a basin and started to wash the feet of the disciples and to dry them off with the towel that was wrapped around him.
Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him: “Lord, are you washing my feet?”
Jesus answered him: “What I am doing you do not understand now, but you will understand after these things.”
Peter said to him: “You will certainly never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him: “Unless I wash you, you have no share with me.”
Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, wash not only my feet but also my hands and my head.”
Jesus said to him: “Whoever has bathed does not need to have more than his feet washed, but is completely clean. And you men are clean, but not all of you.”
For he knew the man who was betraying him. This is why he said: “Not all of you are clean.”
When, now, he had washed their feet and had put his outer garments on, he again reclined at the table and said to them: “Do you understand what I have done to you?
You address me as ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and you are correct, for I am such.
Therefore, if I, the Lord and Teacher, washed your feet, you also should wash the feet of one another.
For I set the pattern for you, that just as I did to you, you should also do.
Most truly I say to you, a slave is not greater than his master, nor is one who is sent greater than the one who sent him.
If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.
I am not talking about all of you; I know the ones I have chosen. But this was so that the scripture might be fulfilled: ‘The one who was eating my bread has lifted his heel against me.’
From this moment on, I am telling you before it occurs, so that when it does occur you may believe that I am he.
Most truly I say to you, whoever receives anyone I send receives me also, and whoever receives me receives also the One who sent me.”
After saying these things, Jesus became troubled in spirit, and he bore witness, saying: “Most truly I say to you, one of you will betray me.”
“Do not let your hearts be troubled. Exercise faith in God; exercise faith also in me.
In the house of my Father are many dwelling places. Otherwise, I would have told you, for I am going my way to prepare a place for you.
Also, if I go my way and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will receive you home to myself, so that where I am you also may be.
And where I am going, you know the way.”
Thomas said to him: “Lord, we do not know where you are going. How can we know the way?”
Jesus said to him: “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.
If you men had known me, you would have known my Father also; from this moment on you know him and have seen him.”
Philip said to him: “Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.”
Jesus said to him: “Even after I have been with you men for such a long time, Philip, have you not come to know me? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also. How is it you say, ‘Show us the Father’?
Do you not believe that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me? The things I say to you I do not speak of my own originality, but the Father who remains in union with me is doing his works.
Believe me that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me; otherwise, believe because of the works themselves.
Most truly I say to you, whoever exercises faith in me will also do the works that I do; and he will do works greater than these, because I am going my way to the Father.
Also, whatever you ask in my name, I will do this, so that the Father may be glorified in connection with the Son.
If you ask anything in my name, I will do it.
“If you love me, you will observe my commandments.
And I will ask the Father and he will give you another helper to be with you forever,
the spirit of the truth, which the world cannot receive, because it neither sees it nor knows it. You know it, because it remains with you and is in you.
I will not leave you bereaved. I am coming to you.
In a little while the world will see me no more, but you will see me, because I live and you will live.
In that day you will know that I am in union with my Father and you are in union with me and I am in union with you.
Whoever has my commandments and observes them is the one who loves me. In turn, whoever loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will clearly show myself to him.”
“I am the true vine, and my Father is the cultivator.
He takes away every branch in me not bearing fruit, and he cleans every one bearing fruit, so that it may bear more fruit.
You are already clean because of the word that I have spoken to you.
Remain in union with me, and I will remain in union with you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine, neither can you unless you remain in union with me.
I am the vine; you are the branches. Whoever remains in union with me and I in union with him, this one bears much fruit; for apart from me you can do nothing at all.
If anyone does not remain in union with me, he is thrown out like a branch and dries up. And men gather those branches and throw them into the fire, and they are burned.
If you remain in union with me and my sayings remain in you, ask whatever you wish and it will take place for you.
My Father is glorified in this, that you keep bearing much fruit and prove yourselves my disciples.
Just as the Father has loved me, so I have loved you; remain in my love.
If you observe my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have observed the commandments of the Father and remain in his love.
“These things I have spoken to you, so that my joy may be in you and your joy may be made full.
This is my commandment, that you love one another just as I have loved you.
No one has love greater than this, that someone should surrender his life in behalf of his friends.
You are my friends if you do what I am commanding you.
I no longer call you slaves, because a slave does not know what his master does. But I have called you friends, because I have made known to you all the things I have heard from my Father.
You did not choose me, but I chose you, and I appointed you to go and keep bearing fruit and that your fruit should remain, so that no matter what you ask the Father in my name, he may give it to you.
“These things I command you, that you love one another.
If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated you.
If you were part of the world, the world would be fond of what is its own. Now because you are no part of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, for this reason the world hates you.
Keep in mind the word I said to you: A slave is not greater than his master. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have observed my word, they will also observe yours.
But they will do all these things against you on account of my name, because they do not know the One who sent me.
“I have said these things to you so that you may not be stumbled.
Men will expel you from the synagogue. In fact, the hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he has offered a sacred service to God.
But they will do these things because they have not come to know either the Father or me.
Nevertheless, I have told you these things so that when the hour for them to happen arrives, you will remember that I told them to you.
But now I am going to the One who sent me; yet not one of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’
But because I have told you these things, grief has filled your hearts.
Nevertheless, I am telling you the truth, it is for your benefit that I am going away. For if I do not go away, the helper will not come to you; but if I do go, I will send him to you.
And when that one comes, he will give the world convincing evidence concerning sin and concerning righteousness and concerning judgment:
first concerning sin, because they are not exercising faith in me;
then concerning righteousness, because I am going to the Father and you will see me no longer;
then concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world has been judged.
“I still have many things to say to you, but you are not able to bear them now.
However, when that one comes, the spirit of the truth, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak of his own initiative, but what he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things to come.
That one will glorify me, because he will receive from what is mine and will declare it to you.
All the things that the Father has are mine. That is why I said he receives from what is mine and declares it to you.
In a little while you will see me no longer, and again, in a little while you will see me.”
At that some of his disciples said to one another: “What does he mean by saying to us, ‘In a little while you will not see me, and again, in a little while you will see me,’ and, ‘because I am going to the Father’?”
So they were saying: “What does he mean by saying, ‘a little while’? We do not know what he is talking about.”
Jesus knew they wanted to question him, so he said to them: “Are you asking one another this because I said: ‘In a little while you will not see me, and again, in a little while you will see me’?
Most truly I say to you, you will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice; you will be grieved, but your grief will be turned into joy.
When a woman is giving birth, she has grief because her hour has come, but when she has given birth to the child, she remembers the tribulation no more because of the joy that a man has been born into the world.
Jesus spoke these things, and raising his eyes to heaven, he said: “Father, the hour has come. Glorify your son so that your son may glorify you,
just as you have given him authority over all flesh, so that he may give everlasting life to all those whom you have given to him.
This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
I have glorified you on the earth, having finished the work you have given me to do.
So now, Father, glorify me at your side with the glory that I had alongside you before the world was.
“I have made your name manifest to the men whom you gave me out of the world. They were yours, and you gave them to me, and they have observed your word.
Now they have come to know that all the things you gave me are from you;
because I have given them the sayings that you gave me, and they have accepted them and have certainly come to know that I came as your representative, and they have believed that you sent me.
I make request concerning them; I make request, not concerning the world, but concerning those whom you have given me, because they are yours;
and all my things are yours and yours are mine, and I have been glorified among them.
“I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, watch over them on account of your own name, which you have given me, so that they may be one just as we are one.
When I was with them, I used to watch over them on account of your own name, which you have given me; and I have protected them, and not one of them is destroyed except the son of destruction, so that the scripture might be fulfilled.
But now I am coming to you, and I am saying these things in the world, so that they may have my joy made complete in themselves.
I have given your word to them, but the world has hated them, because they are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.
“I do not request that you take them out of the world, but that you watch over them because of the wicked one.
They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.
Sanctify them by means of the truth; your word is truth.
Just as you sent me into the world, I also sent them into the world.
And I am sanctifying myself in their behalf, so that they also may be sanctified by means of truth.
“I make request, not concerning these only, but also concerning those putting faith in me through their word,
so that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in union with me and I am in union with you, that they also may be in union with us, so that the world may believe that you sent me.
After he said these things, Jesus went out with his disciples across the Kidʹron Valley to where there was a garden, and he and his disciples went into it.
Now Judas, his betrayer, also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.
So Judas brought the detachment of soldiers and officers of the chief priests and of the Pharisees and came there with torches and lamps and weapons.
Then Jesus, knowing all the things that were going to happen to him, stepped forward and said to them: “Whom are you looking for?”
They answered him: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.” He said to them: “I am he.” Now Judas, his betrayer, was also standing with them.
However, when Jesus said to them, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
So he asked them again: “Whom are you looking for?” They said: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.”
Jesus answered: “I told you that I am he. So if you are looking for me, let these men go.”
This was to fulfill what he had said: “Of those whom you have given me, I have not lost a single one.”
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the slave of the high priest, cutting off his right ear. The name of the slave was Malchus.
Jesus, however, said to Peter: “Put the sword into its sheath. Should I not drink the cup that the Father has given me?”
Then the soldiers and the military commander and the officers of the Jews seized Jesus and bound him.
They led him first to Anʹnas, for he was the father-in-law of Caʹia·phas, who was high priest that year.
Caʹia·phas was, in fact, the one who had advised the Jews that it was to their benefit for one man to die in behalf of the people.
Now Simon Peter, as well as another disciple, was following Jesus. That disciple was known to the high priest, and he went with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest,
but Peter was standing outside at the door. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought Peter in.
The servant girl who was the doorkeeper then said to Peter: “You are not also one of this man’s disciples, are you?” He said: “I am not.”
Now the slaves and the officers were standing around a charcoal fire they had made, because it was cold and they were warming themselves. Peter also was standing with them and warming himself.
So the chief priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.
Jesus answered him: “I have spoken to the world publicly. I always taught in a synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews come together, and I said nothing in secret.
Why do you question me? Question those who have heard what I told them. See! These know what I said.”
Pilate then took Jesus and scourged him.
And the soldiers braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head and clothed him with a purple robe,
and they kept coming up to him and saying: “Greetings, you King of the Jews!” They also kept slapping him in the face.
Pilate went outside again and said to them: “See! I bring him outside to you in order for you to know that I find no fault in him.”
So Jesus came outside, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate said to them: “Look! The man!”
However, when the chief priests and the officers saw him, they shouted: “To the stake with him! To the stake with him!” Pilate said to them: “Take him yourselves and execute him, for I do not find any fault in him.”
The Jews answered him: “We have a law, and according to the law he ought to die, because he made himself God’s son.”
When Pilate heard what they were saying, he became even more fearful,
and he entered the governor’s residence again and said to Jesus: “Where are you from?” But Jesus gave him no answer.
So Pilate said to him: “Are you refusing to speak to me? Do you not know that I have authority to release you and I have authority to execute you?”
Jesus answered him: “You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been granted to you from above. This is why the man who handed me over to you has greater sin.”
For this reason Pilate kept trying to find a way to release him, but the Jews shouted: “If you release this man, you are not a friend of Caesar. Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar.”
Then Pilate, after hearing these words, brought Jesus outside, and he sat down on a judgment seat in a place called the Stone Pavement, but in Hebrew, Gabʹba·tha.
Now it was the day of Preparation of the Passover; it was about the sixth hour. And he said to the Jews: “See! Your king!”
However, they shouted: “Take him away! Take him away! To the stake with him!” Pilate said to them: “Shall I execute your king?” The chief priests answered: “We have no king but Caesar.”
Then he handed him over to them to be executed on the stake.
Bearing the torture stake for himself, he went out to the so-called Skull Place, which is called Golʹgo·tha in Hebrew.
There they nailed him to the stake alongside two other men, one on each side, with Jesus in the middle.
Pilate also wrote a title and put it on the torture stake. It was written: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ the King of the Jews.”
Many of the Jews read this title, because the place where Jesus was nailed to the stake was near the city, and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek.
However, the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate: “Do not write, ‘The King of the Jews,’ but that he said, ‘I am King of the Jews.’”
On the first day of the week, Mary Magʹda·lene came to the tomb early, while it was still dark, and she saw that the stone had already been taken away from the tomb.
So she came running to Simon Peter and to the other disciple, for whom Jesus had affection, and she said to them: “They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.”
Then Peter and the other disciple set out for the tomb.
The two of them began running together, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and reached the tomb first.
Stooping forward, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in.
Then Simon Peter also came, following him, and he went into the tomb. And he saw the linen cloths lying there.
The cloth that had been on his head was not lying with the other cloth bands but was rolled up in a place by itself.
Then the other disciple who had reached the tomb first also went in, and he saw and believed.
For they did not yet understand the scripture that he must rise from the dead.
So the disciples went back to their homes.
Mary, however, kept standing outside near the tomb, weeping. While she was weeping, she stooped forward to look into the tomb,
and she saw two angels in white sitting where the body of Jesus had been lying, one at the head and one at the feet.
And they said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them: “They have taken my Lord away, and I do not know where they have laid him.”
After saying this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not realize that it was Jesus.
Jesus said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?” She, thinking it was the gardener, said to him: “Sir, if you have carried him off, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.”
Jesus said to her: “Mary!” On turning around, she said to him in Hebrew: “Rab·boʹni!” (which means “Teacher!”)
Jesus said to her: “Stop clinging to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and say to them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father and to my God and your God.’”
Mary Magʹda·lene came and brought the news to the disciples: “I have seen the Lord!” And she told them what he had said to her.
When it was late that day, the first day of the week, and the doors were locked where the disciples were for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them: “May you have peace.”
After saying this, he showed them his hands and his side. Then the disciples rejoiced at seeing the Lord.
Jesus said to them again: “May you have peace. Just as the Father has sent me, I also am sending you.”
After this Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples, at the Sea of Ti·beʹri·as. He made the manifestation in this way.
There were together Simon Peter, Thomas (who was called the Twin), Na·thanʹa·el from Caʹna of Galʹi·lee, the sons of Zebʹe·dee, and two others of his disciples.
Simon Peter said to them: “I am going fishing.” They said to him: “We are coming with you.” They went out and got aboard the boat, but during that night they caught nothing.
However, just as day was breaking, Jesus stood on the beach, but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus.
Then Jesus said to them: “Children, you do not have anything to eat, do you?” They answered: “No!”
He said to them: “Cast the net on the right side of the boat and you will find some.” So they cast it, but they were not able to haul it in because of the large number of fish.
Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter: “It is the Lord!” Now Simon Peter, on hearing that it was the Lord, put on his outer garment, for he was naked, and plunged into the sea.
But the other disciples came in the small boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were not a long way from land, only about  feet away.
When they came ashore, they saw there a charcoal fire with fish lying on it and bread.
Jesus said to them: “Bring some of the fish you just now caught.”
So Simon Peter went on board and hauled the net ashore full of big fish,  of them. And though there were so many, the net did not burst.
Jesus said to them: “Come, have your breakfast.” Not one of the disciples had the courage to ask him: “Who are you?” because they knew it was the Lord.
Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and the same with the fish.
This was now the third time that Jesus appeared to the disciples after being raised up from the dead.
When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter: “Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?” He replied to him: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Feed my lambs.”
Again he said to him a second time: “Simon son of John, do you love me?” He replied: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Shepherd my little sheep.”
He said to him a third time: “Simon son of John, do you have affection for me?” Peter became grieved that he asked him the third time: “Do you have affection for me?” So he said to him: “Lord, you are aware of all things; you know that I have affection for you.” Jesus said to him: “Feed my little sheep.
Most truly I say to you, when you were younger, you used to clothe yourself and walk about where you wanted. But when you grow old, you will stretch out your hands and another man will clothe you and carry you where you do not wish.”
He said this to indicate by what sort of death he would glorify God. After he said this, he said to him: “Continue following me.”
Peter turned around and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following, the one who at the evening meal had also leaned back on his chest and said: “Lord, who is the one betraying you?”
So when he caught sight of him, Peter said to Jesus: “Lord, what about this man?”
The first account, O The·ophʹi·lus, I composed about all the things Jesus started to do and to teach
until the day that he was taken up, after he had given instructions through holy spirit to the apostles he had chosen.
After he had suffered, he showed himself alive to them by many convincing proofs. He was seen by them throughout  days, and he was speaking about the Kingdom of God.
While he was meeting with them, he ordered them: “Do not leave Jerusalem, but keep waiting for what the Father has promised, about which you heard from me;
for John, indeed, baptized with water, but you will be baptized with holy spirit not many days after this.”
So when they had assembled, they asked him: “Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?”
He said to them: “It does not belong to you to know the times or seasons that the Father has placed in his own jurisdiction.
But you will receive power when the holy spirit comes upon you, and you will be witnesses of me in Jerusalem, in all Ju·deʹa and Sa·marʹi·a, and to the most distant part of the earth.”
After he had said these things, while they were looking on, he was lifted up and a cloud caught him up from their sight.
And as they were gazing into the sky while he was on his way, suddenly two men in white garments stood beside them
and said: “Men of Galʹi·lee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus who was taken up from you into the sky will come in the same manner as you have seen him going into the sky.”
Then they returned to Jerusalem from a mountain called the Mount of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, only a sabbath day’s journey away.
When they arrived, they went up into the upper room where they were staying. There were Peter as well as John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bar·tholʹo·mew and Matthew, James the son of Al·phaeʹus, and Simon the zealous one, and Judas the son of James.
With one purpose all of these were persisting in prayer, together with some women and Mary the mother of Jesus and with his brothers.
During those days Peter stood up in the midst of the brothers (the number of people was altogether about ) and said:
“Men, brothers, it was necessary for the scripture to be fulfilled that the holy spirit spoke prophetically through David about Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus.
For he had been numbered among us and he obtained a share in this ministry.
(This very man, therefore, purchased a field with the wages for unrighteousness, and falling headfirst, his body burst open and all his insides spilled out.
This became known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the field was called in their language A·kelʹda·ma, that is, “Field of Blood.”)
For it is written in the book of Psalms, ‘Let his dwelling become desolate, and let there be no inhabitant in it’ and, ‘His office of oversight let someone else take.’
It is therefore necessary that of the men who accompanied us during all the time in which the Lord Jesus carried on his activities among us,
starting with his baptism by John until the day he was taken up from us, one of these men should become a witness with us of his resurrection.”
So they proposed two, Joseph called Barʹsab·bas, who was also called Justus, and Mat·thiʹas.
Then they prayed and said: “You, O Jehovah, who know the hearts of all, designate which one of these two men you have chosen
to take the place of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas deviated to go to his own place.”
So they cast lots over them, and the lot fell to Mat·thiʹas, and he was counted along with the  apostles.
Now while the day of the Festival of Pentecost was in progress, they were all together at the same place.
Suddenly there was a noise from heaven, just like that of a rushing, stiff breeze, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting.
And tongues as if of fire became visible to them and were distributed, and one came to rest on each one of them,
and they all became filled with holy spirit and started to speak in different languages, just as the spirit enabled them to speak.
At that time devout Jews from every nation under heaven were staying in Jerusalem.
So when this sound occurred, a crowd gathered and was bewildered, because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
Indeed, they were utterly amazed and said: “See here, all these who are speaking are Gal·i·leʹans, are they not?
How is it, then, that each one of us is hearing his own native language?
Parʹthi·ans, Medes, and Eʹlam·ites, the inhabitants of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, Ju·deʹa and Cap·pa·doʹci·a, Ponʹtus and the province of Asia,
Phrygʹi·a and Pam·phylʹi·a, Egypt and the regions of Libʹy·a near Cy·reʹne, sojourners from Rome, both Jews and proselytes,
Creʹtans, and Arabians—we hear them speaking in our languages about the magnificent things of God.”
Yes, they were all astonished and perplexed, saying to one another: “What does this mean?”
However, others mocked them and said: “They are full of sweet wine.”
But Peter stood up with the Eleven and spoke to them in a loud voice: “Men of Ju·deʹa and all you inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be known to you and listen carefully to my words.
These people are, in fact, not drunk, as you suppose, for it is the third hour of the day.
On the contrary, this is what was said through the prophet Joel:
‘“And in the last days,” God says, “I will pour out some of my spirit on every sort of flesh, and your sons and your daughters will prophesy and your young men will see visions and your old men will dream dreams,
and even on my male slaves and on my female slaves I will pour out some of my spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
And I will give wonders in heaven above and signs on earth below—blood and fire and clouds of smoke.
The sun will be turned into darkness and the moon into blood before the great and illustrious day of Jehovah comes.
And everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”’
“Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ was a man publicly shown to you by God through powerful works and wonders and signs that God did through him in your midst, just as you yourselves know.
This man, who was handed over by the determined will and foreknowledge of God, you fastened to a stake by the hand of lawless men, and you did away with him.
But God resurrected him by releasing him from the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to be held fast by it.
For David says about him: ‘I keep Jehovah constantly in front of me, for he is at my right hand that I may never be shaken.
On this account my heart became cheerful and my tongue rejoiced greatly. And I will reside in hope;
because you will not leave me in the Grave, nor will you allow your loyal one to see corruption.
You have made life’s ways known to me; you will fill me with great joy in your presence.’
Now Peter and John were going up into the temple for the hour of prayer, the ninth hour,
and a man who was lame from birth was being carried. Every day they would put him near the temple door that was called Beautiful, so he could ask for gifts of mercy from those entering the temple.
When he caught sight of Peter and John about to go into the temple, he began asking for gifts of mercy.
But Peter, together with John, looked straight at him and said: “Look at us.”
So he fixed his attention on them, expecting to get something from them.
However, Peter said: “Silver and gold I do not possess, but what I do have is what I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ the Naz·a·reneʹ, walk!”
With that he took hold of him by the right hand and raised him up. Instantly his feet and his ankles were made firm;
and leaping to his feet, he began walking and went with them into the temple, walking and leaping and praising God.
And all the people saw him walking and praising God.
And they began to recognize him, that this was the man who used to sit waiting for gifts of mercy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they were completely astonished and ecstatic about what had happened to him.
While the man was still holding on to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them at what was called Solʹo·mon’s Colonnade, completely surprised.
When Peter saw this, he said to the people: “Men of Israel, why are you so amazed at this, and why are you staring at us as though by personal power or godly devotion we have made him walk?
The God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, the God of our forefathers, has glorified his Servant, Jesus, whom you handed over and disowned before Pilate, even though he had decided to release him.
Yes, you disowned that holy and righteous one, and you asked for a man who was a murderer to be given to you,
whereas you killed the Chief Agent of life. But God raised him up from the dead, of which fact we are witnesses.
And through his name, and by our faith in his name, this man whom you see and know has been made strong. The faith that is through him has made this man completely healthy in front of all of you.
And now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, just as your rulers also did.
But in this way God has fulfilled the things he announced beforehand through the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ would suffer.
“Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out, so that seasons of refreshing may come from Jehovah himself
and he may send the Christ appointed for you, Jesus.
Heaven must hold this one within itself until the times of restoration of all things of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets of old.
In fact, Moses said: ‘Jehovah your God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet like me. You must listen to whatever he tells you.
Indeed, anyone who does not listen to that Prophet will be completely destroyed from among the people.’
And all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed him, as many as have spoken, have also plainly declared these days.
You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your forefathers, saying to Abraham: ‘And by means of your offspring all the families of the earth will be blessed.’
God, after raising up his Servant, sent him to you first to bless you by turning each one of you away from your wicked deeds.”
While the two were speaking to the people, the priests, the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees came up to them.
These were annoyed because the apostles were teaching the people and were openly declaring the resurrection of Jesus from the dead.
So they seized them and took them into custody until the next day, for it was already evening.
However, many of those who had listened to the speech believed, and the number of the men became about ,.
The next day their rulers, elders, and scribes gathered together in Jerusalem,
along with Anʹnas the chief priest, Caʹia·phas, John, Alexander, and all who were relatives of the chief priest.
They stood Peter and John in their midst and began to question them: “By what power or in whose name did you do this?”
Then Peter, filled with holy spirit, said to them:
if we are being examined today about a good deed to a crippled man, and you want to know who made this man well,
let it be known to all of you and to all the people of Israel that in the name of Jesus Christ the Naz·a·reneʹ, whom you executed on a stake but whom God raised up from the dead, by means of him this man stands here healthy in front of you.
This is ‘the stone that was treated by you builders as of no account that has become the chief cornerstone.’
Furthermore, there is no salvation in anyone else, for there is no other name under heaven that has been given among men by which we must get saved.”
Now when they saw the outspokenness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were uneducated and ordinary men, they were astonished. And they began to realize that they had been with Jesus.
As they were looking at the man who had been cured standing with them, they had nothing to say in answer to this.
So they commanded them to go outside the Sanʹhe·drin hall, and they began consulting with one another,
saying: “What should we do with these men? Because, for a fact, a noteworthy sign has occurred through them, one evident to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.
So that this does not spread any further among the people, let us threaten them and tell them not to speak to anyone anymore on the basis of this name.”
With that they called them and ordered them not to say anything at all or to teach on the basis of the name of Jesus.
But in reply Peter and John said to them: “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves.
But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.”
So after they had threatened them further, they released them, since they did not find any grounds for punishing them and on account of the people, because they were all glorifying God over what had happened.
For the man on whom this miracle of healing had been done was more than  years old.
After being released, they went to their own people and reported what the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
On hearing this, they raised their voices with one accord to God and said:
and who said through holy spirit by the mouth of our forefather David, your servant: ‘Why did nations become agitated and peoples meditate on empty things?
The kings of the earth took their stand and the rulers gathered together as one against Jehovah and against his anointed one.’
For truly both Herod and Pontius Pilate with men of the nations and with peoples of Israel were gathered together in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed,
to do what your hand and counsel had determined beforehand to occur.
However, a man named An·a·niʹas, together with his wife Sap·phiʹra, sold some property.
But he secretly held back some of the price, with his wife’s knowledge, and he brought just a part of it and deposited it at the feet of the apostles.
But Peter said: “An·a·niʹas, why has Satan emboldened you to lie to the holy spirit and secretly hold back some of the price of the field?
As long as it remained with you, did it not remain yours? And after it was sold, was it not in your control? Why have you thought up such a deed as this in your heart? You have lied, not to men, but to God.”
On hearing these words, An·a·niʹas collapsed and died. And great fear came over all those who heard about it.
Then the younger men rose, wrapped him in cloths, carried him out, and buried him.
Now after an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
Peter said to her: “Tell me, did you two sell the field for so much?” She said: “Yes, for that amount.”
So Peter said to her: “Why did you two agree to make a test of the spirit of Jehovah? Look! The feet of those who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out.”
Instantly she collapsed at his feet and died. When the young men came in, they found her dead and they carried her out and buried her alongside her husband.
So great fear came over the whole congregation and over all those hearing about these things.
Moreover, through the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders continued to occur among the people; and they would all meet together in Solʹo·mon’s Colonnade.
True, none of the others had the courage to join them; nevertheless, the people were speaking highly of them.
More than that, believers in the Lord kept on being added, great numbers both of men and of women.
They even brought the sick out into the main streets and laid them there on small beds and mats, so that as Peter would pass by, at least his shadow might fall on some of them.
Also, crowds of people from the cities around Jerusalem kept coming, carrying sick people and those troubled with unclean spirits, and they were one and all cured.
But the high priest rose, and all those with him, who were of the sect of the Sadducees, and they were filled with jealousy.
And they seized the apostles and put them in the public jail.
But during the night, Jehovah’s angel opened the doors of the prison, brought them out, and said:
“Go and take your stand in the temple, and keep on speaking to the people all the sayings about this life.”
After hearing this, they entered the temple at daybreak and began to teach.
But when the officers got there, they did not find them in the prison. So they returned and made their report,
saying: “We found the jail locked and secure, and the guards were standing at the doors, but on opening it up, we found no one inside.”
Well, when both the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these words, they were perplexed about what would come of this.
But someone came and reported to them: “Look! The men you put in prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the people.”
Then the captain went off with his officers and brought them in, but without violence, because they were afraid of being stoned by the people.
So they brought them and stood them before the Sanʹhe·drin. Then the high priest questioned them
and said: “We strictly ordered you not to keep teaching on the basis of this name, and yet look! you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and you are determined to bring the blood of this man upon us.”
Now in those days when the disciples were increasing, the Greek-speaking Jews began complaining against the Hebrew-speaking Jews, because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution.
So the Twelve called the multitude of the disciples together and said: “It is not right for us to leave the word of God to distribute food to tables.
So, brothers, select for yourselves seven reputable men from among you, full of spirit and wisdom, that we may appoint them over this necessary matter;
but we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”
What they said was pleasing to the whole multitude, and they selected Stephen, a man full of faith and holy spirit, as well as Philip, Prochʹo·rus, Ni·caʹnor, Tiʹmon, Parʹme·nas, and Nic·o·laʹus, a proselyte of Antioch.
They brought them to the apostles, and after praying, they laid their hands on them.
Consequently, the word of God continued to spread, and the number of the disciples kept multiplying very much in Jerusalem; and a large crowd of priests began to be obedient to the faith.
Now Stephen, full of divine favor and power, was performing great wonders and signs among the people.
But some men of the so-called Synagogue of the Freedmen came forward, along with some Cy·reʹni·ans and Alexandrians, and some from Ci·liʹcia and Asia, to dispute with Stephen.
But they could not hold their own against the wisdom and the spirit with which he was speaking.
Then they secretly persuaded men to say: “We have heard him speaking blasphemous things against Moses and God.”
And they stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes, and coming upon him suddenly, they forcibly seized him and led him to the Sanʹhe·drin.
And they brought forward false witnesses, who said: “This man does not stop speaking things against this holy place and against the Law.
For instance, we have heard him say that this Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ will throw down this place and change the customs that Moses handed down to us.”
And as all those sitting in the Sanʹhe·drin stared at him, they saw that his face was like an angel’s face.
But the high priest said: “Are these things so?”
Stephen replied: “Men, brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our forefather Abraham while he was in Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, before he took up residence in Haʹran,
and he said to him: ‘Go out from your land and from your relatives and come into the land that I will show you.’
Then he went out of the land of the Chal·deʹans and took up residence in Haʹran. And from there, after his father died, God caused him to resettle in this land where you now dwell.
And yet, he did not give him any inheritance in it, no, not even enough to put his foot on; but he promised to give it to him as a possession and after him to his offspring, though as yet he had no child.
Moreover, God told him that his offspring would be foreigners in a land not theirs and that the people would enslave them and afflict them for  years.
‘And that nation for which they will slave I will judge,’ God said, ‘and after these things they will come out and will offer sacred service to me in this place.’
“He also gave him a covenant of circumcision, and he became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob of the  family heads.
And the family heads became jealous of Joseph and sold him into Egypt. But God was with him,
and he rescued him out of all his tribulations and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. And he appointed him to govern Egypt and his whole house.
But a famine came on all of Egypt and Caʹnaan, yes, a great tribulation, and our forefathers could not find anything to eat.
But Jacob heard that there were food supplies in Egypt, and he sent our forefathers out the first time.
During the second time, Joseph made himself known to his brothers, and the family of Joseph became known to Pharʹaoh.
So Joseph sent a message and called his father Jacob and all his relatives from that place,  persons in all.
So Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died there, and so did our forefathers.
They were carried to Sheʹchem and were laid in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a sum of silver money from the sons of Haʹmor in Sheʹchem.
“Just as the time was approaching to fulfill the promise that God had announced to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,
until there rose a different king over Egypt, one who did not know of Joseph.
This one dealt cunningly with our race and wrongfully forced the fathers to abandon their infants so that they would not be kept alive.
At that time Moses was born, and he was divinely beautiful. And he was nursed for three months in his father’s home.
But when he was abandoned, the daughter of Pharʹaoh took him and brought him up as her own son.
So Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. In fact, he was powerful in his words and deeds.
“Now when he reached the age of , it came into his heart to make a visit on his brothers, the sons of Israel.
When he caught sight of one of them being unjustly treated, he defended him and avenged the one being abused by striking down the Egyptian.
He thought that his brothers would grasp that God was giving them salvation by his hand, but they did not grasp it.
The next day he appeared to them as they were fighting, and he tried to reconcile them in peace, saying: ‘Men, you are brothers. Why do you mistreat each other?’
But the one who was mistreating his neighbor pushed him away, saying: ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge over us?
You do not want to do away with me the way you did away with the Egyptian yesterday, do you?’
Saul, for his part, approved of his murder.
But devout men carried Stephen away to bury him, and they made a great mourning over him.
Saul, though, began to ravage the congregation. He would invade one house after another, dragging out both men and women and turning them over to prison.
However, those who had been scattered went through the land declaring the good news of the word.
Now Philip went down to the city of Sa·marʹi·a and began to preach the Christ to them.
The crowds with one accord were paying attention to what Philip said while they listened and observed the signs he was performing.
For many had unclean spirits, and these would cry out with a loud voice and come out. Moreover, many who were paralyzed and lame were cured.
So there came to be a great deal of joy in that city.
Now in the city was a man named Simon, who prior to this had been practicing magical arts and amazing the nation of Sa·marʹi·a, claiming that he was somebody great.
All of them, from the least to the greatest, would pay attention to him and say: “This man is the Power of God, which is called Great.”
So they would pay attention to him because he had amazed them for quite a while by his magical arts.
But when they believed Philip, who was declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God and of the name of Jesus Christ, both men and women were getting baptized.
Simon himself also became a believer, and after being baptized, he continued with Philip; and he was amazed at seeing the signs and great powerful works taking place.
When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Sa·marʹi·a had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them;
and these went down and prayed for them to get holy spirit.
For it had not yet come upon any one of them, but they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
Then they laid their hands on them, and they began to receive holy spirit.
Now when Simon saw that the spirit was given through the laying on of the hands of the apostles, he offered them money,
saying: “Give me this authority also, so that anyone on whom I lay my hands may receive holy spirit.”
But Peter said to him: “May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could acquire the free gift of God with money.
You have neither part nor share in this matter, for your heart is not straight in the sight of God.
So repent of this badness of yours, and supplicate Jehovah that, if possible, the wicked intention of your heart may be forgiven you;
for I see you are a bitter poison and a slave of unrighteousness.”
In answer Simon said to them: “Make supplication for me to Jehovah that none of the things you have said may come upon me.”
Therefore, when they had given the witness thoroughly and had spoken the word of Jehovah, they started back toward Jerusalem, and they went declaring the good news to many villages of the Sa·marʹi·tans.
However, Jehovah’s angel spoke to Philip, saying: “Get up and go to the south to the road that runs down from Jerusalem to Gazʹa.” (This is a desert road.)
With that he got up and went, and look! an E·thi·oʹpi·an eunuch, a man who had authority under Can·daʹce, queen of the E·thi·oʹpi·ans, and who was in charge of all her treasure. He had gone to Jerusalem to worship,
and he was returning and was sitting in his chariot, reading aloud the prophet Isaiah.
But Saul, still breathing threat and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest
and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that he might bring bound to Jerusalem any whom he found who belonged to The Way, both men and women.
Now as he was traveling and getting near Damascus, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him,
and he fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him: “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?”
He asked: “Who are you, Lord?” He said: “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
But get up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.”
Now the men who were traveling with him stood speechless, hearing, indeed, the sound of a voice but seeing no one.
Saul then got up from the ground, and though his eyes were open, he could see nothing. So they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus.
And for three days he did not see anything, and he neither ate nor drank.
There was a disciple named An·a·niʹas in Damascus, and the Lord said to him in a vision: “An·a·niʹas!” He said: “Here I am, Lord.”
The Lord said to him: “Get up, go to the street called Straight, and look for a man named Saul, from Tarsus, at the house of Judas. For look! he is praying,
and in a vision he has seen a man named An·a·niʹas come in and lay his hands on him so that he may recover sight.”
But An·a·niʹas answered: “Lord, I have heard from many about this man, about all the harm he did to your holy ones in Jerusalem.
And here he has authority from the chief priests to arrest all those calling on your name.”
But the Lord said to him: “Go! because this man is a chosen vessel to me to bear my name to the nations as well as to kings and the sons of Israel.
For I will show him plainly how many things he must suffer for my name.”
So An·a·niʹas went and entered the house, and he laid his hands on him and said: “Saul, brother, the Lord Jesus, who appeared to you on the road along which you were coming, has sent me so that you may recover sight and be filled with holy spirit.”
And immediately, what looked like scales fell from his eyes, and he recovered his sight. He then got up and was baptized,
and he ate some food and gained strength.
and immediately in the synagogues he began to preach about Jesus, that this one is the Son of God.
But all those hearing him were astonished and were saying: “Is this not the man who ravaged those in Jerusalem who call on this name? Did he not come here for the purpose of arresting them and taking them to the chief priests?”
But Saul kept on acquiring more and more power and was confounding the Jews who lived in Damascus, as he proved logically that this is the Christ.
Now when many days had passed, the Jews plotted together to do away with him.
However, their plot against Saul became known to him. They were also watching the gates closely both day and night in order to do away with him.
So his disciples took him and let him down by night through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.
On arriving in Jerusalem, he made efforts to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, because they did not believe he was a disciple.
So Barʹna·bas came to his aid and led him to the apostles, and he told them in detail how on the road he had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus.
So he remained with them, moving about freely in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord.
Now there was a man in Caes·a·reʹa named Cornelius, an army officer in what was called the Italian unit.
He was a devout man who feared God together with all his household, and he made many gifts of mercy to the people and made supplication to God continually.
About the ninth hour of the day, he saw plainly in a vision an angel of God come in to him and say: “Cornelius!”
Cornelius stared at him, terrified, and asked: “What is it, Lord?” He said to him: “Your prayers and gifts of mercy have ascended as a remembrance before God.
So now send men to Jopʹpa and summon a man named Simon who is called Peter.
This man is staying as a guest with Simon, a tanner who has a house by the sea.”
As soon as the angel who spoke to him left, he called two of his servants and a devout soldier from among those who were his attendants,
and he related everything to them and sent them to Jopʹpa.
The next day as they were continuing on their journey and were approaching the city, Peter went up to the housetop about the sixth hour to pray.
But he became very hungry and wanted to eat. While they were preparing the meal, he fell into a trance
and saw heaven opened and something descending like a great linen sheet being let down by its four corners on the earth;
and in it were all sorts of four-footed animals and reptiles of the earth and birds of heaven.
Then a voice said to him: “Get up, Peter, slaughter and eat!”
But Peter said: “Not at all, Lord, because I have never eaten anything defiled and unclean.”
And the voice spoke again to him, the second time: “Stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.”
This happened a third time, and immediately it was taken up into heaven.
While Peter was still perplexed about what the vision he had seen could mean, just then the men sent by Cornelius asked where Simon’s house was and stood there at the gate.
They called out and inquired whether Simon who was called Peter was a guest there.
As Peter was still pondering over the vision, the spirit said: “Look! Three men are asking for you.
So get up, go downstairs and go with them, not doubting at all, because I have sent them.”
Then Peter went downstairs to the men and said: “Here I am, the one you are looking for. Why are you here?”
They said: “Cornelius, an army officer, a righteous and God-fearing man who is well-reported-on by the whole nation of the Jews, was given divine instructions by a holy angel to send for you to come to his house and to hear what you have to say.”
So he invited them in and had them stay as his guests.
The following day he entered into Caes·a·reʹa. Cornelius, of course, was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
As Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and did obeisance to him.
But Peter lifted him up, saying: “Rise; I too am just a man.”
As he conversed with him, he went in and found many people assembled.
He said to them: “You well know how unlawful it is for a Jew to associate with or approach a man of another race, and yet God has shown me that I should call no man defiled or unclean.
Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Ju·deʹa heard that people of the nations had also accepted the word of God.
So when Peter came up to Jerusalem, the supporters of circumcision began to criticize him,
saying: “You went into the house of men who were not circumcised and ate with them.”
At this Peter went on to explain the matter in detail to them, saying:
“I was in the city of Jopʹpa praying, and while in a trance I saw a vision, something descending like a great linen sheet being let down by its four corners from heaven, and it came right down to me.
Looking closely into it, I observed four-footed animals of the earth, wild beasts, reptiles, and birds of heaven.
I also heard a voice say to me: ‘Get up, Peter, slaughter and eat!’
But I said: ‘Certainly not, Lord, because a defiled or unclean thing has never entered my mouth.’
The second time, the voice from heaven answered: ‘You stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.’
This happened a third time, and everything was pulled up again into heaven.
Also just at that moment, three men were standing at the house where we were staying, having been sent to me from Caes·a·reʹa.
Then the spirit told me to go with them, not doubting at all. But these six brothers also went with me, and we entered into the house of the man.
“He reported to us how he saw the angel stand in his house and say: ‘Send men to Jopʹpa and summon Simon who is called Peter,
and he will tell you things by which you and all your household may get saved.’
But when I started to speak, the holy spirit fell on them just as it did also on us in the beginning.
At this I recalled the saying of the Lord, how he used to say: ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with holy spirit.’
If, therefore, God gave the same free gift to them that he gave to us who have believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I should be able to hinder God?”
When they heard these things, they stopped objecting, and they glorified God, saying: “So, then, God has also granted to people of the nations repentance leading to life.”
Now those who had been scattered by the tribulation that arose over Stephen went as far as Phoe·niʹcia, Cyʹprus, and Antioch, but they spoke the word only to the Jews.
However, some of the men among them from Cyʹprus and Cy·reʹne came to Antioch and began talking to the Greek-speaking people, declaring the good news of the Lord Jesus.
Furthermore, the hand of Jehovah was with them, and a great number became believers and turned to the Lord.
The report about them reached the ears of the congregation in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barʹna·bas as far as Antioch.
When he arrived and saw the undeserved kindness of God, he rejoiced and began to encourage them all to continue in the Lord with heartfelt resolve;
for he was a good man and full of holy spirit and faith. And a considerable crowd was added to the Lord.
So he went to Tarsus to make a thorough search for Saul.
After he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for a whole year they assembled with them in the congregation and taught quite a crowd, and it was first in Antioch that the disciples were by divine providence called Christians.
In those days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
One of them named Agʹa·bus stood up and foretold through the spirit that a great famine was about to come on the entire inhabited earth, which, in fact, did take place in the time of Claudius.
About that time Herod the king began mistreating some of those of the congregation.
He put James the brother of John to death by the sword.
When he saw that it was pleasing to the Jews, he also went on to arrest Peter. (This was during the days of the Unleavened Bread.)
He seized him and put him in prison, turning him over to four shifts of four soldiers each to guard him, intending to bring him out before the people after the Passover.
So Peter was being kept in the prison, but the congregation was intensely praying to God for him.
When Herod was about to bring him out, that night Peter was sleeping bound with two chains between two soldiers, and guards in front of the door were keeping watch over the prison.
But look! Jehovah’s angel was standing there, and a light shone in the prison cell. Hitting Peter on the side, he woke him, saying: “Get up quickly!” And the chains fell off his hands.
The angel said to him: “Get dressed and put on your sandals.” He did so. Finally he said to him: “Put your outer garment on, and keep following me.”
And he went out and kept following him, but he did not know that what was happening through the angel was real. In fact, he thought he was seeing a vision.
Going past the first sentinel guard and the second, they reached the iron gate leading into the city, and this opened to them by itself. After they went out, they made their way down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.
And Peter, realizing what was happening, said: “Now I know for sure that Jehovah sent his angel and rescued me from Herod’s hand and from everything that the Jews were expecting to happen.”
After he realized this, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John who was called Mark, where quite a few were gathered together and were praying.
When he knocked at the door of the gateway, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer the call.
On recognizing the voice of Peter, she was so overjoyed that she did not open the gate, but ran inside and reported that Peter was standing at the gateway.
They said to her: “You are out of your mind.” But she kept insisting that it was so. They began to say: “It is his angel.”
But Peter remained there, knocking. When they opened the door, they saw him and were astonished.
But he motioned to them with his hand to be silent and told them in detail how Jehovah had brought him out of the prison, and he said: “Report these things to James and the brothers.” With that he went out and traveled to another place.
Now when it became day, there was quite a disturbance among the soldiers over what had become of Peter.
Herod made a diligent search for him, and not finding him, he interrogated the guards and commanded them to be led off to punishment; and he went down from Ju·deʹa to Caes·a·reʹa and spent some time there.
Now he was in an angry mood against the people of Tyre and Siʹdon. So they came to him with one purpose, and after persuading Blastus, the man in charge of the king’s household affairs, they sued for peace, because their country was supplied with food from the land of the king.
On a set day, Herod clothed himself with royal raiment and sat down on the judgment seat and began giving them a public address.
Then the people who were assembled began shouting: “A god’s voice, and not a man’s!”
Instantly the angel of Jehovah struck him, because he did not give the glory to God, and he was eaten up with worms and died.
But the word of Jehovah went on growing and spreading.
As for Barʹna·bas and Saul, after fully carrying out the relief work in Jerusalem, they returned and took along with them John, the one also called Mark.
Now in Antioch there were prophets and teachers in the local congregation: Barʹna·bas, Symʹe·on who was called Niʹger, Lucius of Cy·reʹne, Manʹa·en who was educated with Herod the district ruler, and Saul.
As they were ministering to Jehovah and fasting, the holy spirit said: “Set aside for me Barʹna·bas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”
Then after fasting and praying, they laid their hands on them and sent them off.
So these men, sent out by the holy spirit, went down to Se·leuʹcia, and from there they sailed away to Cyʹprus.
When they arrived in Salʹa·mis, they began proclaiming the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. They also had John as an attendant.
When they had gone through the whole island as far as Paʹphos, they met up with a Jewish man named Bar-Jeʹsus, who was a sorcerer and a false prophet.
He was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. Calling Barʹna·bas and Saul to him, this man was eager to hear the word of God.
But Elʹy·mas the sorcerer (for that is how his name is translated) began opposing them, trying to turn the proconsul away from the faith.
Then Saul, also called Paul, becoming filled with holy spirit, looked at him intently
and said: “O man full of every sort of fraud and every sort of villainy, you son of the Devil, you enemy of everything righteous, will you not quit distorting the right ways of Jehovah?
Look! Jehovah’s hand is upon you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sunlight for a time.” Instantly a thick mist and darkness fell on him, and he went around trying to find someone to lead him by the hand.
Then the proconsul, on seeing what had happened, became a believer, for he was astounded at the teaching of Jehovah.
Now Paul and his companions put out to sea from Paʹphos and arrived at Perga in Pam·phylʹi·a. But John left them and returned to Jerusalem.
However, they went on from Perga and came to Antioch in Pi·sidʹi·a. And going into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, they took a seat.
After the public reading of the Law and the Prophets, the presiding officers of the synagogue sent word to them, saying: “Men, brothers, if you have any word of encouragement for the people, tell it.”
So Paul stood up, and motioning with his hand, he said:
The God of this people Israel chose our forefathers, and he exalted the people while they lived as foreigners in the land of Egypt and brought them out of it with an uplifted arm.
And for a period of about  years, he put up with them in the wilderness.
After destroying seven nations in the land of Caʹnaan, he assigned their land as an inheritance.
All of that was during about  years.
But afterward they demanded a king, and God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for  years.
After removing him, he raised up for them David as king, about whom he bore witness and said: ‘I have found David the son of Jesʹse a man agreeable to my heart; he will do all the things I desire.’
According to his promise, from the offspring of this man, God has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus.
Before the arrival of that one, John had preached publicly to all the people of Israel baptism in symbol of repentance.
But as John was finishing his course, he would say: ‘What do you suppose I am? I am not he. But look! One is coming after me the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.’
“Men, brothers, you descendants of Abraham’s family and those others among you who fear God, the word of this salvation has been sent to us.
For the inhabitants of Jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize this one, but when acting as judges, they fulfilled the things spoken by the Prophets, which are read aloud every sabbath.
Even though they found no cause for death, they demanded of Pilate to have him executed.
Now in I·coʹni·um they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews and spoke in such a manner that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks became believers.
But the Jews who did not believe stirred up and wrongly influenced the people of the nations against the brothers.
So they spent considerable time speaking with boldness by the authority of Jehovah, who bore witness to the word of his undeserved kindness by allowing signs and wonders to be performed through them.
However, the multitude of the city was divided; some were for the Jews but others for the apostles.
When both the people of the nations and the Jews with their rulers made an attempt to treat them insolently and stone them,
they were informed of it, and they fled to the cities of Lyc·a·oʹni·a, Lysʹtra and Derʹbe, and to the surrounding country.
There they went on declaring the good news.
Now in Lysʹtra there was a man sitting down whose feet were crippled. He was lame from birth and had never walked.
This man was listening to Paul as he was speaking. Paul, looking intently at him and seeing that he had faith to be made well,
said with a loud voice: “Stand up on your feet.” So the man leaped up and began walking.
When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they cried out in the Lyc·a·oʹni·an language: “The gods have become like humans and have come down to us!”
And they started calling Barʹna·bas Zeus, but Paul Herʹmes, since he was taking the lead in speaking.
And the priest of Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance of the city, brought bulls and garlands to the gates and wanted to offer sacrifices with the crowds.
However, when the apostles Barʹna·bas and Paul heard of it, they ripped their garments and leaped out into the crowd and cried out:
“Men, why are you doing these things? We too are humans having the same infirmities as you have. And we are declaring the good news to you, for you to turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them.
In past generations he permitted all the nations to go on in their ways,
although he did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying you with food and filling your hearts with gladness.”
And yet despite saying these things, they barely restrained the crowds from sacrificing to them.
But Jews arrived from Antioch and I·coʹni·um and persuaded the crowds, and they stoned Paul and dragged him outside the city, imagining that he was dead.
However, when the disciples surrounded him, he got up and entered the city. On the next day he left with Barʹna·bas for Derʹbe.
After declaring the good news to that city and making quite a few disciples, they returned to Lysʹtra, I·coʹni·um, and Antioch.
There they strengthened the disciples, encouraging them to remain in the faith and saying: “We must enter into the Kingdom of God through many tribulations.”
Moreover, they appointed elders for them in each congregation, offering prayer with fasting, and they entrusted them to Jehovah, in whom they had become believers.
Then they went through Pi·sidʹi·a and came into Pam·phylʹi·a,
and after proclaiming the word in Perga, they went down to At·ta·liʹa.
From there they sailed off for Antioch, where they had been entrusted to the undeserved kindness of God for the work they had now completed.
When they had arrived and had gathered the congregation together, they related the many things God had done by means of them, and that he had opened to the nations the door to faith.
So they spent considerable time with the disciples.
Now some men came down from Ju·deʹa and began to teach the brothers: “Unless you get circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.”
But after quite a bit of dissension and disputing by Paul and Barʹna·bas with them, it was arranged for Paul, Barʹna·bas, and some of the others to go up to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem regarding this issue.
So after being escorted partway by the congregation, these men continued on through both Phoe·niʹcia and Sa·marʹi·a, relating in detail the conversion of people of the nations and bringing great joy to all the brothers.
On arriving in Jerusalem, they were kindly received by the congregation and the apostles and the elders, and they related the many things God had done by means of them.
But some of those of the sect of the Pharisees who had become believers stood up from their seats and said: “It is necessary to circumcise them and command them to observe the Law of Moses.”
So the apostles and the elders gathered together to look into this matter.
After much intense discussion had taken place, Peter rose and said to them: “Men, brothers, you well know that from early days God made the choice among you that through my mouth people of the nations should hear the word of the good news and believe.
And God, who knows the heart, bore witness by giving them the holy spirit, just as he did to us also.
And he made no distinction at all between us and them, but purified their hearts by faith.
So why are you now making a test of God by imposing on the neck of the disciples a yoke that neither our forefathers nor we were capable of bearing?
On the contrary, we have faith that we are saved through the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus in the same way that they are.”
At that the entire group became silent, and they began to listen to Barʹna·bas and Paul relate the many signs and wonders that God had done through them among the nations.
After they finished speaking, James replied: “Men, brothers, hear me.
Symʹe·on has related thoroughly how God for the first time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.
And with this the words of the Prophets agree, just as it is written:
‘After these things I will return and raise up again the tent of David that is fallen down; I will rebuild its ruins and restore it,
so that the men who remain may earnestly seek Jehovah, together with people of all the nations, people who are called by my name, says Jehovah, who is doing these things,
known from of old.’
Therefore, my decision is not to trouble those from the nations who are turning to God,
but to write them to abstain from things polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood.
For from ancient times Moses has had those who preach him in city after city, because he is read aloud in the synagogues on every sabbath.”
Then the apostles and the elders, together with the whole congregation, decided to send chosen men from among them to Antioch, along with Paul and Barʹna·bas; they sent Judas who was called Barʹsab·bas and Silas, who were leading men among the brothers.
They wrote this and sent it through them:
Since we have heard that some went out from among us and caused you trouble with what they have said, trying to subvert you, although we did not give them any instructions,
we have come to a unanimous decision to choose men to send to you together with our beloved Barʹna·bas and Paul,
men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We are therefore sending Judas and Silas, so that they also may report the same things by word of mouth.
For the holy spirit and we ourselves have favored adding no further burden to you except these necessary things:
So he arrived at Derʹbe and also at Lysʹtra. And a disciple named Timothy was there, the son of a believing Jewish woman but of a Greek father,
and he was well-reported-on by the brothers in Lysʹtra and I·coʹni·um.
Paul expressed the desire for Timothy to accompany him, and he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews in those places, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
As they traveled on through the cities, they would deliver to them for observance the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles and the elders who were in Jerusalem.
Then, indeed, the congregations continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number day by day.
Moreover, they traveled through Phrygʹi·a and the country of Ga·laʹti·a, because they were forbidden by the holy spirit to speak the word in the province of Asia.
Further, when they came down to Mysʹi·a, they made efforts to go into Bi·thynʹi·a, but the spirit of Jesus did not permit them.
So they passed by Mysʹi·a and came down to Troʹas.
And during the night a vision appeared to Paul—a Mac·e·doʹni·an man was standing there urging him and saying: “Step over into Mac·e·doʹni·a and help us.”
As soon as he had seen the vision, we tried to go into Mac·e·doʹni·a, drawing the conclusion that God had summoned us to declare the good news to them.
So we put out to sea from Troʹas and made a straight run to Samʹo·thrace, but on the following day to Ne·apʹo·lis;
and from there we went to Phi·lipʹpi, a colony, which is the principal city of the district of Mac·e·doʹni·a. We stayed in this city for some days.
On the Sabbath day we went outside the gate beside a river, where we thought there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and began speaking to the women who had assembled.
And a woman named Lydʹi·a, a seller of purple from the city of Thy·a·tiʹra and a worshipper of God, was listening, and Jehovah opened her heart wide to pay attention to the things Paul was saying.
Now when she and her household got baptized, she urged us: “If you have considered me to be faithful to Jehovah, come and stay at my house.” And she just made us come.
Now it happened that as we were going to the place of prayer, a servant girl with a spirit, a demon of divination, met us. She supplied her masters with much profit by fortune-telling.
This girl kept following Paul and us and crying out with the words: “These men are slaves of the Most High God and are proclaiming to you the way of salvation.”
She kept doing this for many days. Finally Paul got tired of it and turned and said to the spirit: “I order you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” And it came out that very hour.
Well, when her masters saw that their hope of profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace to the rulers.
Leading them up to the civil magistrates, they said: “These men are disturbing our city very much. They are Jews,
and they are proclaiming customs that it is not lawful for us to adopt or practice, seeing that we are Romans.”
And the crowd rose up together against them, and the civil magistrates, after tearing the garments off them, gave the command to beat them with rods.
After they had inflicted many blows on them, they threw them into prison and ordered the jailer to guard them securely.
Because he got such an order, he threw them into the inner prison and fastened their feet in the stocks.
But about the middle of the night, Paul and Silas were praying and praising God with song, and the prisoners were listening to them.
Suddenly a great earthquake occurred, so that the foundations of the jail were shaken. Moreover, all the doors were instantly opened, and everyone’s bonds came loose.
When the jailer woke up and saw that the prison doors were open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, assuming that the prisoners had escaped.
But Paul called out with a loud voice: “Do not hurt yourself, for we are all here!”
They now traveled through Am·phipʹo·lis and Ap·ol·loʹni·a and came to Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
So according to Paul’s custom he went inside to them, and for three sabbaths he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
explaining and proving by references that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, saying: “This is the Christ, this Jesus whom I am proclaiming to you.”
As a result, some of them became believers and associated themselves with Paul and Silas, and so did a great multitude of the Greeks who worshipped God, along with quite a few of the principal women.
But the Jews, getting jealous, gathered together some wicked men who were loitering at the marketplace and formed a mob and proceeded to throw the city into an uproar. They assaulted the house of Jaʹson and were seeking to have Paul and Silas brought out to the mob.
When they did not find them, they dragged Jaʹson and some of the brothers to the city rulers, crying out: “These men who have overturned the inhabited earth are present here also,
and Jaʹson has received them as his guests. All these men act in opposition to the decrees of Caesar, saying there is another king, Jesus.”
When they heard these things, the crowd and the city rulers were alarmed;
and after taking sufficient security from Jaʹson and the others, they let them go.
Immediately by night the brothers sent both Paul and Silas to Be·roeʹa. On arriving, they went into the synagogue of the Jews.
Now these were more noble-minded than those in Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, for they accepted the word with the greatest eagerness of mind, carefully examining the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were so.
Therefore, many of them became believers, and so did quite a few of the reputable Greek women as well as some of the men.
But when the Jews from Thes·sa·lo·niʹca learned that the word of God was also being proclaimed by Paul in Be·roeʹa, they came there to incite and agitate the crowds.
Then the brothers immediately sent Paul away to the sea, but both Silas and Timothy remained behind there.
However, those accompanying Paul brought him as far as Athens, and they departed after receiving instructions that Silas and Timothy should come to Paul as quickly as possible.
Now while Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit within him became irritated on seeing that the city was full of idols.
So he began to reason in the synagogue with the Jews and the other people who worshipped God and every day in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.
But some of both the Ep·i·cu·reʹan and the Stoʹic philosophers began disputing with him, and some were saying: “What is it this chatterer would like to tell?” Others: “He seems to be a proclaimer of foreign deities.” This was because he was declaring the good news of Jesus and the resurrection.
So they took hold of him and led him to the Ar·e·opʹa·gus, saying: “Can we get to know what this new teaching is that you are speaking about?
For you are introducing some things that are strange to our ears, and we want to know what these things mean.”
In fact, all Athenians and the foreigners staying there would spend their leisure time doing nothing else but telling or listening to something new.
Paul now stood in the midst of the Ar·e·opʹa·gus and said:
For instance, while passing along and carefully observing your objects of veneration, I found even an altar on which had been inscribed ‘To an Unknown God.’ Therefore, what you are unknowingly worshipping, this I am declaring to you.
The God who made the world and all the things in it, being, as he is, Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in handmade temples;
nor is he served by human hands as if he needed anything, because he himself gives to all people life and breath and all things.
And he made out of one man every nation of men to dwell on the entire surface of the earth, and he decreed the appointed times and the set limits of where men would dwell,
so that they would seek God, if they might grope for him and really find him, although, in fact, he is not far off from each one of us.
For by him we have life and move and exist, even as some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also his children.’
After this he departed from Athens and came to Corinth.
And he found a Jew named Aqʹui·la, a native of Ponʹtus who had recently come from Italy with Pris·cilʹla his wife, because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. So he went to them,
and because he had the same trade, he stayed at their home and worked with them, for they were tentmakers by trade.
He would give a talk in the synagogue every sabbath and would persuade Jews and Greeks.
When, now, both Silas and Timothy came down from Mac·e·doʹni·a, Paul began to be intensely occupied with the word, witnessing to the Jews to prove that Jesus is the Christ.
But after they kept on opposing him and speaking abusively, he shook out his garments and said to them: “Let your blood be on your own heads. I am clean. From now on I will go to people of the nations.”
So he transferred from there and went into the house of a man named Titius Justus, a worshipper of God, whose house adjoined the synagogue.
But Crisʹpus, the presiding officer of the synagogue, became a believer in the Lord, along with all his household. And many of the Corinthians who heard began to believe and be baptized.
Moreover, the Lord said to Paul in a vision by night: “Do not be afraid, but keep on speaking and do not keep silent,
for I am with you and no man will assault you to harm you; for I have many people in this city.”
So he stayed there for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
While Galʹli·o was proconsul of A·chaʹia, the Jews made a concerted attack against Paul and led him to the judgment seat,
saying: “This man is persuading people to worship God in a way contrary to the law.”
But as Paul was about to speak, Galʹli·o said to the Jews: “If, indeed, it were some wrong or a serious crime, O Jews, it would be reasonable for me to hear you out patiently.
But if it is controversies over speech and names and your own law, you yourselves must see to it. I do not wish to be a judge of these things.”
With that he drove them away from the judgment seat.
So they all seized Sosʹthe·nes, the presiding officer of the synagogue, and began beating him in front of the judgment seat. But Galʹli·o would not get involved at all with these things.
However, after staying quite a few days longer, Paul said good-bye to the brothers and sailed away for Syria, accompanied by Pris·cilʹla and Aqʹui·la. He had his hair clipped short in Cenʹchre·ae, for he had made a vow.
So they arrived at Ephʹe·sus, and he left them there; but he entered the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
Although they kept requesting him to stay longer, he would not consent
but said good-bye and told them: “I will return to you again, if Jehovah is willing.” And he put out to sea from Ephʹe·sus
and came down to Caes·a·reʹa. And he went up and greeted the congregation and then went down to Antioch.
After spending some time there, he departed and went from place to place through the country of Ga·laʹti·a and Phrygʹi·a, strengthening all the disciples.
Now a Jew named A·polʹlos, a native of Alexandria, arrived in Ephʹe·sus; he was an eloquent man who was well-versed in the Scriptures.
This man had been instructed in the way of Jehovah, and aglow with the spirit, he was speaking and teaching accurately the things about Jesus, but he was acquainted only with the baptism of John.
He began to speak boldly in the synagogue, and when Pris·cilʹla and Aqʹui·la heard him, they took him into their company and explained the way of God more accurately to him.
Further, because he wanted to go across to A·chaʹia, the brothers wrote to the disciples, urging them to receive him kindly. So when he got there, he greatly helped those who through God’s undeserved kindness had become believers;
for publicly and with great intensity he thoroughly proved the Jews to be wrong, showing them from the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.
In the course of events, while A·polʹlos was in Corinth, Paul went through the inland regions and came down to Ephʹe·sus. There he found some disciples
and said to them: “Did you receive holy spirit when you became believers?” They replied to him: “Why, we have never heard that there is a holy spirit.”
So he said: “In what, then, were you baptized?” They said: “In John’s baptism.”
Paul said: “John baptized with the baptism in symbol of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one coming after him, that is, in Jesus.”
On hearing this, they got baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul laid his hands on them, the holy spirit came upon them, and they began speaking in foreign languages and prophesying.
There were about  men in all.
Entering the synagogue, for three months he spoke with boldness, giving talks and reasoning persuasively about the Kingdom of God.
But when some stubbornly refused to believe, speaking injuriously about The Way before the crowd, he withdrew from them and separated the disciples from them, giving talks daily in the school auditorium of Ty·ranʹnus.
This went on for two years, so that all those living in the province of Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.
And God kept performing extraordinary powerful works through the hands of Paul,
so that even cloths and aprons that had touched his body were carried to the sick, and the diseases left them, and the wicked spirits came out.
But some of the Jews who traveled around casting out demons also tried to use the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had wicked spirits; they would say: “I solemnly charge you by Jesus whom Paul preaches.”
Now there were seven sons of a Jewish chief priest named Sceʹva doing this.
But in answer the wicked spirit said to them: “I know Jesus and I am acquainted with Paul; but who are you?”
At that the man with the wicked spirit leaped on them, overpowered them one after the other, and prevailed against them, so that they fled naked and wounded out of that house.
This became known to all, both the Jews and the Greeks who lived in Ephʹe·sus; and fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus went on being magnified.
And many of those who had become believers would come and confess and report their practices openly.
Indeed, quite a number of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them up before everybody. And they calculated their value and found them worth , pieces of silver.
Thus in a mighty way, the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing.
After these things had taken place, Paul resolved in his spirit that after going through Mac·e·doʹni·a and A·chaʹia, he would travel to Jerusalem. He said: “After going there, I must also see Rome.”
So he sent to Mac·e·doʹni·a two of those who ministered to him, Timothy and E·rasʹtus, but he himself stayed on for some time in the province of Asia.
At that time quite a disturbance arose concerning The Way.
For a man named De·meʹtri·us, a silversmith who made silver shrines of Arʹte·mis, brought considerable profit to the craftsmen.
He gathered them and others who worked at such things and said: “Men, you well know that from this business comes our prosperity.
Now you see and hear how, not only in Ephʹe·sus but in nearly all the province of Asia, this Paul has persuaded a considerable crowd and turned them to another opinion, saying that the gods made by hands are not really gods.
Moreover, the danger exists not only that this business of ours will come into disrepute but also that the temple of the great goddess Arʹte·mis will be viewed as nothing, and she who is worshipped in the whole province of Asia and the inhabited earth will be deprived of her magnificence.”
Hearing this and becoming full of anger, the men began crying out: “Great is Arʹte·mis of the E·pheʹsians!”
When the uproar had subsided, Paul sent for the disciples, and after he had encouraged them and said farewell, he began his journey to Mac·e·doʹni·a.
After going through those regions and giving many words of encouragement to the ones there, he arrived in Greece.
He spent three months there, but because a plot was hatched against him by the Jews when he was about to set sail for Syria, he made up his mind to return through Mac·e·doʹni·a.
He was accompanied by Sopʹa·ter the son of Pyrʹrhus of Be·roeʹa, Ar·is·tarʹchus and Se·cunʹdus of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans, Gaʹius of Derʹbe, Timothy and, from the province of Asia, Tychʹi·cus and Trophʹi·mus.
These men went on ahead and were waiting for us in Troʹas;
but we put out to sea from Phi·lipʹpi after the days of the Unleavened Bread, and within five days we came to them in Troʹas, and there we spent seven days.
On the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to have a meal, Paul began addressing them, as he was going to depart the next day; and he prolonged his speech until midnight.
So there were quite a few lamps in the upper room where we were gathered together.
Seated at the window, a young man named Euʹty·chus sank into a deep sleep while Paul kept talking, and overcome by sleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead.
But Paul went downstairs, threw himself on him and embraced him, and said: “Stop making a commotion, for he is alive.”
He then went upstairs and began the meal and ate. He continued conversing for quite a while, until daybreak, and then he departed.
So they took the boy away alive and were comforted beyond measure.
We now went ahead to the ship and set sail for Asʹsos, where we were intending to take Paul aboard, for after giving instructions to this effect, he was intending to go there on foot.
So when he caught up with us in Asʹsos, we took him aboard and went to Mit·y·leʹne.
And sailing away from there the next day, we arrived off Chiʹos, but the day after that, we touched at Saʹmos, and on the following day, we arrived at Mi·leʹtus.
Paul had decided to sail past Ephʹe·sus so as not to spend any time in the province of Asia, for he was hurrying to get to Jerusalem on the day of the Festival of Pentecost if he possibly could.
However, from Mi·leʹtus he sent word to Ephʹe·sus and called for the elders of the congregation.
When they came to him, he said to them: “You well know how I conducted myself among you from the first day I stepped into the province of Asia,
slaving for the Lord with all humility and with tears and trials that befell me by the plots of the Jews,
while I did not hold back from telling you any of the things that were profitable nor from teaching you publicly and from house to house.
But I thoroughly bore witness both to Jews and to Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus.
And now look! bound in the spirit, I am traveling to Jerusalem, although not knowing what will happen to me there,
except that from city to city the holy spirit repeatedly bears witness to me, saying that imprisonment and tribulations are waiting for me.
Nevertheless, I do not consider my own life of any importance to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.
“And now look! I know that none of you among whom I preached the Kingdom will ever see my face again.
So I call you to witness this very day that I am clean from the blood of all men,
for I have not held back from telling you all the counsel of God.
Pay attention to yourselves and to all the flock, among which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the congregation of God, which he purchased with the blood of his own Son.
After tearing ourselves away from them and putting out to sea, we ran with a straight course and came to Cos, on the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patʹa·ra.
When we found a ship that was crossing to Phoe·niʹcia, we went aboard and sailed away.
After coming in sight of the island of Cyʹprus, we left it behind on the left side and sailed on to Syria and landed at Tyre, where the ship was to unload its cargo.
We searched for and found the disciples and remained there for seven days. But through the spirit they repeatedly told Paul not to set foot in Jerusalem.
So when our time there was over, we left and started on our way, but they all, together with the women and children, accompanied us until we were outside the city. And kneeling down on the beach, we prayed
and said good-bye to one another. Then we went aboard the ship, and they returned to their homes.
We then completed the voyage from Tyre and arrived at Ptol·e·maʹis, and we greeted the brothers and stayed one day with them.
The next day we left and came to Caes·a·reʹa, and we entered the house of Philip the evangelizer, who was one of the seven men, and we stayed with him.
This man had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
But after we had stayed there for quite a number of days, a prophet named Agʹa·bus came down from Ju·deʹa.
And he came to us and took Paul’s belt and tied his own feet and hands and said: “Thus says the holy spirit, ‘The man to whom this belt belongs will be bound like this by the Jews in Jerusalem, and they will give him into the hands of people of the nations.’”
Now when we heard this, both we and those who were there began begging him not to go up to Jerusalem.
Then Paul answered: “What are you doing by weeping and trying to weaken my resolve? Rest assured, I am ready not only to be bound but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
When he would not be dissuaded, we stopped objecting and said: “Let the will of Jehovah take place.”
Now after these days we prepared for the journey and started on our way to Jerusalem.
Some of the disciples from Caes·a·reʹa also went with us, taking us to Mnaʹson of Cyʹprus, an early disciple at whose home we were to be guests.
When we got to Jerusalem, the brothers welcomed us gladly.
But on the following day Paul went in with us to James, and all the elders were present.
And he greeted them and began giving a detailed account of the things God did among the nations through his ministry.
After hearing this, they began to glorify God, but they said to him: “You see, brother, how many thousands of believers there are among the Jews, and they are all zealous for the Law.
But they have heard it rumored about you that you have been teaching all the Jews among the nations an apostasy from Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or to follow the customary practices.
What, then, is to be done about it? They are certainly going to hear that you have arrived.
So do what we tell you: We have four men who have put themselves under a vow.
Take these men with you and cleanse yourself ceremonially together with them and take care of their expenses, so that they may have their heads shaved. Then everyone will know that there is nothing to the rumors they were told about you, but that you are walking orderly and you are also keeping the Law.
As for the believers from among the nations, we have sent them our decision in writing that they should keep away from what is sacrificed to idols as well as from blood, from what is strangled, and from sexual immorality.”
Then Paul took the men the next day and cleansed himself ceremonially along with them, and he went into the temple to give notice of when the days for the ceremonial cleansing would be completed and the offering should be presented for each one of them.
Now when the seven days were about to end, the Jews from Asia, on seeing him in the temple, stirred up the whole crowd, and they seized him,
shouting: “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people and our Law and this place. And what is more, he even brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled this holy place.”
“Men, brothers and fathers, hear my defense to you now.”
Well, when they heard that he was addressing them in the Hebrew language, they kept all the more silent, and he said:
“I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Ci·liʹcia, but educated in this city at the feet of Ga·maʹli·el, instructed according to the strictness of the ancestral Law, and zealous for God just as all of you are this day.
I persecuted this Way to the point of death, binding and handing over to prisons both men and women,
as the high priest and all the assembly of elders can bear witness. From them I also obtained letters to the brothers in Damascus, and I was on my way to bring those who were there in bonds to Jerusalem to be punished.
“But as I was traveling and getting near to Damascus, about midday, suddenly out of heaven a great light flashed all around me,
and I fell to the ground and heard a voice say to me: ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’
I answered: ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And he said to me: ‘I am Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ, whom you are persecuting.’
Now the men who were with me did see the light, but they did not hear the voice of the one speaking to me.
At that I said: ‘What should I do, Lord?’ The Lord said to me: ‘Rise, go into Damascus, and there you will be told about everything it is appointed for you to do.’
But since I could not see anything because of the glory of that light, I arrived in Damascus led by the hand of those who were with me.
“Then a man named An·a·niʹas, a devout man according to the Law, well-reported-on by all the Jews living there,
came to me. He stood by me and said to me: ‘Saul, brother, regain your sight!’ And that very moment I looked up and saw him.
He said: ‘The God of our forefathers has chosen you to come to know his will and to see the righteous one and to hear the voice of his mouth,
because you are to be a witness for him to all men of the things you have seen and heard.
And now why are you delaying? Rise, get baptized, and wash your sins away by your calling on his name.’
“But when I had returned to Jerusalem and was praying in the temple, I fell into a trance
and saw him saying to me: ‘Hurry up and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not accept your witness concerning me.’
And I said: ‘Lord, they themselves well know that I used to imprison and flog in one synagogue after another those believing in you;
and when the blood of Stephen your witness was being spilled, I was standing by and approving and guarding the outer garments of those doing away with him.’
And yet he said to me: ‘Go, because I will send you out to nations far away.’”
Now they kept listening to him down to this word. Then they raised their voices, saying: “Take such a man away from the earth, for he is not fit to live!”
Because they were crying out, throwing their outer garments about, and tossing dust into the air,
the military commander ordered Paul to be brought into the soldiers’ quarters and said that he should be interrogated under scourging, so that he could learn exactly why they were shouting against Paul this way.
But when they had stretched him out for the whipping, Paul said to the army officer standing there: “Is it lawful for you to scourge a Roman who has not been condemned?”
Well, when the army officer heard this, he went to the military commander and reported it, saying: “What are you intending to do? For this man is a Roman.”
So the military commander approached and said to him: “Tell me, are you a Roman?” He said: “Yes.”
The military commander responded: “I purchased these rights as a citizen for a large sum of money.” Paul said: “But I have them by birth.”
Looking intently at the Sanʹhe·drin, Paul said: “Men, brothers, I have behaved before God with a perfectly clear conscience down to this day.”
At this the high priest An·a·niʹas ordered those standing by him to strike him on the mouth.
Then Paul said to him: “God is going to strike you, you whitewashed wall. Do you sit to judge me according to the Law and at the same time violate the Law by commanding me to be struck?”
Those standing by said: “Are you insulting the high priest of God?”
And Paul said: “Brothers, I did not know he was high priest. For it is written, ‘You must not speak injuriously of a ruler of your people.’”
Now Paul, knowing that the one part was made up of Sadducees but the other of Pharisees, cried out in the Sanʹhe·drin: “Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Over the hope of the resurrection of the dead I am being judged.”
Because he said this, a dissension arose between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the assembly was split.
For the Sadducees say that there is neither resurrection nor angel nor spirit, but the Pharisees accept them all.
So a great uproar broke out, and some of the scribes of the party of the Pharisees rose and began arguing fiercely, saying: “We find nothing wrong in this man, but if a spirit or an angel spoke to him—.”
Now when the dissension grew great, the military commander feared that Paul would be torn apart by them, and he commanded the soldiers to go down and snatch him from their midst and bring him into the soldiers’ quarters.
But the following night the Lord stood by him and said: “Take courage! For just as you have been giving a thorough witness about me in Jerusalem, so you must also bear witness in Rome.”
When it became day, the Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.
There were more than  men who formed this oath-bound conspiracy.
These men went to the chief priests and the elders and said: “We have solemnly bound ourselves with a curse not to eat anything at all until we have killed Paul.
So now you together with the Sanʹhe·drin should inform the military commander that he should bring him down to you as though you want to examine his case more thoroughly. But before he gets near, we will be ready to do away with him.”
However, the son of Paul’s sister heard of the ambush they were planning, and he entered the soldiers’ quarters and reported it to Paul.
Paul then called one of the army officers to him and said: “Take this young man to the military commander, for he has something to report to him.”
So he brought him and led him to the military commander and said: “The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you.”
The military commander took him by the hand and withdrew privately and asked him: “What do you have to report to me?”
He said: “The Jews have agreed to request you to bring Paul down to the Sanʹhe·drin tomorrow, as though they intend to learn more details about his case.
But do not let them persuade you, for more than  of their men are waiting to ambush him, and they have bound themselves with a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him; and they are now ready, waiting for the promise from you.”
So the military commander let the young man go, after ordering him: “Do not tell anyone that you have informed me of this.”
And he summoned two of the army officers and said: “Get  soldiers ready to march clear to Caes·a·reʹa, also  horsemen and  spearmen, at the third hour of the night.
Also, provide horses for Paul to ride, to take him safely to Felix the governor.”
And he wrote a letter with this content:
“Claudius Lysʹi·as to His Excellency, Governor Felix: Greetings!
This man was seized by the Jews and was about to be killed by them, but I came quickly with my soldiers and rescued him, because I learned that he is a Roman.
And wanting to find out the cause for which they were accusing him, I brought him down into their Sanʹhe·drin.
Five days later the high priest An·a·niʹas came down with some elders and a public speaker named Ter·tulʹlus, and they presented their case against Paul to the governor.
When he was called, Ter·tulʹlus started accusing him, saying:
at all times and also in all places we acknowledge this, Your Excellency Felix, with the greatest thankfulness.
But that I may not detain you any further, I beg you to hear us briefly in your kindness.
For we have found this man to be a pest, stirring up seditions among all the Jews throughout the inhabited earth, and he is a spearhead of the sect of the Naz·a·renesʹ.
He also tried to profane the temple, so we seized him.
——
When you examine him yourself, you will find out about all these things of which we are accusing him.”
With that the Jews also joined in the attack, asserting that these things were true.
When the governor nodded to Paul to speak, he answered:
As you can verify for yourself, it has not been more than  days since I went up to worship in Jerusalem;
and they found me neither arguing with anyone in the temple nor stirring up a mob, either in the synagogues or throughout the city.
Nor can they prove to you the things they are accusing me of right now.
But I do admit this to you, that according to the way that they call a sect, in this manner I am rendering sacred service to the God of my forefathers, as I believe all the things set forth in the Law and written in the Prophets.
And I have hope toward God, which hope these men also look forward to, that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.
Because of this I always strive to maintain a clear conscience before God and men.
Now after quite a number of years, I arrived to bring gifts of mercy to my nation and to make offerings.
While I was caring for these matters, they found me ceremonially cleansed in the temple, but not with a crowd or causing a disturbance. But there were some Jews from the province of Asia
who ought to be present before you to accuse me if they actually have anything against me.
Or let the men here say for themselves what wrong they found as I stood before the Sanʹhe·drin,
except for this one thing that I cried out while standing among them: ‘Over the resurrection of the dead I am today being judged before you!’”
However, Felix, knowing quite well the facts concerning this Way, began to put them off and say: “Whenever Lysʹi·as the military commander comes down, I will decide these matters involving you.”
And he gave orders to the army officer that the man be kept under arrest but given some freedom, and that his people be allowed to attend to his needs.
Some days later Felix came with Dru·silʹla his wife, who was Jewish, and he sent for Paul and listened to him speak about the belief in Christ Jesus.
But as Paul talked about righteousness and self-control and the judgment to come, Felix became frightened and answered: “Go away for now, but when I have an opportunity I will send for you again.”
At the same time he was hoping that Paul would give him money. For that reason, he sent for him even more frequently and conversed with him.
But when two years had elapsed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and because Felix desired to gain favor with the Jews, he left Paul in custody.
Therefore Festus, after arriving in the province and taking charge, went up three days later to Jerusalem from Caes·a·reʹa.
And the chief priests and the principal men of the Jews gave him information against Paul. So they began to beg Festus
as a favor to send for Paul to come to Jerusalem. But they were planning to ambush Paul and kill him along the road.
However, Festus answered that Paul was to be kept in Caes·a·reʹa and that he himself was about to go back there shortly.
“So let those who are in power among you,” he said, “come down with me and accuse him if, indeed, the man has done something wrong.”
So when he had spent not more than eight or ten days among them, he went down to Caes·a·reʹa, and the next day he sat down on the judgment seat and commanded Paul to be brought in.
When he came in, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many serious charges that they were unable to prove.
But Paul said in defense: “Neither against the Law of the Jews nor against the temple nor against Caesar have I committed any sin.”
Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, said in reply to Paul: “Do you wish to go up to Jerusalem and be judged before me there concerning these things?”
But Paul said: “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to be judged. I have done no wrong to the Jews, of which you are also becoming well-aware.
If I am really a wrongdoer and have committed anything deserving of death, I do not beg off from dying; but if there is no substance to the accusations these men have made against me, no man has the right to hand me over to them as a favor. I appeal to Caesar!”
Then Festus, after speaking with the assembly of counselors, replied: “To Caesar you have appealed; to Caesar you will go.”
After some days had passed, A·gripʹpa the king and Bernice arrived in Caes·a·reʹa for a courtesy visit to Festus.
Since they were spending a number of days there, Festus presented Paul’s case to the king, saying:
and when I was in Jerusalem the chief priests and the elders of the Jews brought information about him, asking for a judgment of condemnation against him.
But I replied to them that it is not Roman procedure to hand any man over as a favor before the accused man meets his accusers face-to-face and gets a chance to speak in his defense concerning the complaint.
So when they arrived here, I did not delay, but the next day I sat down on the judgment seat and commanded the man to be brought in.
Taking the stand, the accusers did not charge him with any of the wicked things I had expected concerning him.
They simply had certain disputes with him concerning their own worship of the deity and concerning a man named Jesus, who was dead but who Paul kept asserting was alive.
Being at a loss as to how to handle this dispute, I asked if he would like to go to Jerusalem and be judged there concerning these matters.
But when Paul appealed to be kept in custody for the decision by the August One, I commanded him to be held until I should send him on to Caesar.”
A·gripʹpa then said to Festus: “I would like to hear the man myself.” “Tomorrow,” he said, “you will hear him.”
So the next day A·gripʹpa and Bernice came with much pompous show and entered the audience chamber together with military commanders as well as the prominent men in the city; and when Festus gave the command, Paul was brought in.
And Festus said: “King A·gripʹpa and all you who are present with us, you see this man about whom the whole Jewish populace have petitioned me both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
But I perceived that he had done nothing deserving of death. So when this man himself appealed to the August One, I decided to send him.
But I have nothing certain to write about him to my Lord. So I brought him before all of you, and especially before you, King A·gripʹpa, so that after the judicial examination has taken place, I might have something to write.
For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner and not also to indicate the charges against him.”
A·gripʹpa said to Paul: “You are permitted to speak in your own behalf.” Then Paul stretched out his hand and proceeded to say in his defense:
“Concerning all the things of which I am accused by the Jews, King A·gripʹpa, I consider myself happy that it is before you I am to make my defense this day,
especially because you are an expert on all the customs as well as the controversies among the Jews. Therefore, I beg you to hear me patiently.
“Indeed, the manner of life I led from youth up among my people and in Jerusalem is well-known by all the Jews
who were previously acquainted with me, if they would be willing to testify, that according to the strictest sect of our form of worship, I lived as a Pharisee.
But now for the hope of the promise that was made by God to our forefathers, I stand on trial;
this is the same promise our  tribes are hoping to see fulfilled by intensely rendering him sacred service night and day. Concerning this hope I am accused by Jews, O King.
“Why is it considered unbelievable among you that God raises up the dead?
I, for one, was convinced that I should commit many acts of opposition against the name of Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.
This is exactly what I did in Jerusalem, and I locked up many of the holy ones in prisons, for I had received authority from the chief priests; and when they were to be executed, I cast my vote against them.
By punishing them often in all the synagogues, I tried to force them to recant; and since I was extremely furious with them, I went so far as to persecute them even in outlying cities.
“While doing this as I was traveling to Damascus with authority and a commission from the chief priests,
I saw at midday on the road, O King, a light beyond the brilliance of the sun flash from heaven around me and around those traveling with me.
And when we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice say to me in the Hebrew language: ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? To keep kicking against the goads makes it hard for you.’
But I said: ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord said: ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
But rise and stand on your feet. This is why I have appeared to you, to choose you as a servant and a witness both of things you have seen and things I will make you see respecting me.
And I will rescue you from this people and from the nations, to whom I am sending you
to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light and from the authority of Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among those sanctified by their faith in me.’
“Therefore, King A·gripʹpa, I did not become disobedient to the heavenly vision,
but to those in Damascus first and then to those in Jerusalem, and over all the country of Ju·deʹa, and also to the nations, I was bringing the message that they should repent and turn to God by doing works that befit repentance.
This is why the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me.
However, because I have experienced the help that is from God, I continue to this day bearing witness to both small and great, saying nothing except what the Prophets as well as Moses stated was going to take place—
that the Christ was to suffer and that as the first to be resurrected from the dead, he was going to proclaim light both to this people and to the nations.”
Now as Paul was saying these things in his defense, Festus said in a loud voice: “You are going out of your mind, Paul! Great learning is driving you out of your mind!”
But Paul said: “I am not going out of my mind, Your Excellency Festus, but I am speaking words of truth and of a sound mind.
For a fact, the king to whom I am speaking so freely well knows about these things; I am convinced that not one of these things escapes his notice, for none of this has been done in a corner.
Do you, King A·gripʹpa, believe the Prophets? I know that you believe.”
But A·gripʹpa said to Paul: “In a short time you would persuade me to become a Christian.”
Now as it was decided for us to sail away to Italy, they handed Paul and some other prisoners over to an army officer named Julius, of the unit of Au·gusʹtus.
Going aboard a ship from Ad·ra·mytʹti·um that was about to sail to ports along the coast of the province of Asia, we set sail; Ar·is·tarʹchus, a Mac·e·doʹni·an from Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, was with us.
The next day we landed at Siʹdon, and Julius treated Paul with kindness and permitted him to go to his friends and enjoy their care.
And putting out to sea from there, we sailed under the shelter of Cyʹprus, because the winds were against us.
Then we navigated through the open sea along Ci·liʹcia and Pam·phylʹi·a and put into port at Myʹra in Lyʹci·a.
There the army officer found a ship from Alexandria that was sailing for Italy, and he made us board it.
Then after sailing on slowly quite a number of days, we came to Cniʹdus with difficulty. Because the wind did not let us make headway, we sailed under the shelter of Crete off Sal·moʹne.
And sailing with difficulty along the coast, we came to a place called Fair Havens, which was near the city of La·seʹa.
A considerable time had passed and by now it was hazardous to navigate, because even the fast of Atonement Day was already over, so Paul made a recommendation
to them: “Men, I can see that this voyage is going to result in damage and great loss not only of the cargo and the ship but also of our lives.”
However, the army officer listened to the pilot and the shipowner rather than to what Paul was saying.
Since the harbor was unsuitable for wintering, the majority advised setting sail from there to see if they could somehow make it to spend the winter in Phoenix, a harbor of Crete that opens toward the northeast and toward the southeast.
When the south wind blew softly, they thought they had achieved their purpose, and they lifted anchor and began sailing along Crete close to the shore.
After a short time, however, a violent wind called Eu·ro·aqʹui·lo rushed down on it.
As the ship was violently seized and was not able to keep its head against the wind, we gave way to it and were driven along.
Then we ran under the shelter of a small island called Cauʹda, and yet we were hardly able to get the skiff at the stern of the ship under control.
But after hoisting it aboard, they used supports to undergird the ship, and fearing that they would run aground on the Syrʹtis, they lowered the gear and so were driven along.
Because we were being violently tossed by the storm, they began to lighten the ship the following day.
And on the third day, they threw away the tackling of the ship with their own hands.
When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and a violent storm was battering us, all hope of our being saved finally began to fade.
After they had gone a long time without food, Paul stood up in their midst and said: “Men, you certainly should have taken my advice and not have put out to sea from Crete and as a result suffered this damage and loss.
Still, I now urge you to take courage, for not one of you will be lost, only the ship will.
This night an angel of the God to whom I belong and to whom I render sacred service stood by me
and said: ‘Have no fear, Paul. You must stand before Caesar, and look! God has granted to you all those sailing with you.’
So take courage, men, for I believe God that it will be exactly as I was told.
However, we must be cast ashore on some island.”
Now when the th night fell and we were being tossed about on the Sea of Aʹdri·a, at midnight the sailors began to suspect that they were getting near to some land.
They sounded the depth and found it  fathoms, so they proceeded a short distance and again made a sounding and found it  fathoms.
After we made it to safety, we learned that the island was called Malta.
And the foreign-speaking people showed us extraordinary kindness. They kindled a fire and received all of us kindly because of the rain that was falling and because of the cold.
But when Paul collected a bundle of sticks and laid it on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened itself on his hand.
When the foreign-speaking people caught sight of the venomous creature hanging from his hand, they began saying to one another: “Surely this man is a murderer, and although he made it to safety from the sea, Justice did not permit him to keep on living.”
However, he shook the creature off into the fire and suffered no harm.
But they were expecting him to swell up or suddenly to drop dead. After they waited for a long time and saw that nothing bad happened to him, they changed their mind and began saying he was a god.
Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the principal man of the island, whose name was Pubʹli·us, and he welcomed us and entertained us hospitably for three days.
It so happened that the father of Pubʹli·us was lying in bed sick with fever and dysentery, and Paul went in to him and prayed, laid his hands on him, and healed him.
After this occurred, the rest of the people on the island who were sick also began to come to him and be cured.
They also honored us with many gifts, and when we were setting sail, they loaded us up with whatever we needed.
Three months later we set sail in a ship with the figurehead “Sons of Zeus.” The ship was from Alexandria and had wintered in the island.
Putting into port at Syracuse, we remained there for three days;
from there we went along and arrived at Rheʹgi·um. A day later a south wind sprang up and we made it into Pu·teʹo·li on the second day.
Here we found brothers and were urged to remain with them for seven days, and so we went toward Rome.
From there the brothers, when they heard the news about us, came as far as the Marketplace of Apʹpi·us and Three Taverns to meet us. On catching sight of them, Paul thanked God and took courage.
When finally we entered Rome, Paul was permitted to stay by himself with the soldier guarding him.
However, three days later he called together the principal men of the Jews. When they had assembled, he said to them: “Men, brothers, although I had done nothing contrary to the people or the customs of our forefathers, I was handed over as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
And after making an examination, they wanted to release me, for there were no grounds for putting me to death.
But when the Jews objected, I was compelled to appeal to Caesar, but not because I had any accusation to make against my nation.
So for this reason I asked to see and speak to you, for it is because of the hope of Israel that I have this chain around me.”
They said to him: “We have not received letters about you from Ju·deʹa, nor have any of the brothers who came from there reported or spoken anything bad about you.
But we think it proper to hear from you what your thoughts are, for truly as regards this sect, we know that it is spoken against everywhere.”
They now arranged for a day to meet with him, and they came in even greater numbers to him in his lodging place. And from morning to evening, he explained the matter to them by bearing thorough witness concerning the Kingdom of God, to persuade them about Jesus from both the Law of Moses and the Prophets.
Some began to believe the things he said; others would not believe.
So because they disagreed with one another, they began to leave, and Paul made this one comment:
saying, ‘Go to this people and say: “You will indeed hear but by no means understand, and you will indeed look but by no means see.
For the heart of this people has grown unreceptive, and with their ears they have heard without response, and they have shut their eyes, so that they might never see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn back and I heal them.”’
So let it be known to you that this salvation from God has been sent out to the nations; they will certainly listen to it.”
Paul, a slave of Christ Jesus and called to be an apostle, set apart for God’s good news,
which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,
concerning his Son, who came to be from the offspring of David according to the flesh,
but who with power was declared God’s Son according to the spirit of holiness by means of resurrection from the dead—yes, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Through him we received undeserved kindness and an apostleship with a view to obedience by faith among all the nations respecting his name,
among which nations you also have been called to belong to Jesus Christ—
to all those who are in Rome as God’s beloved ones, called to be holy ones:
First of all, I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ concerning all of you, because your faith is talked about throughout the whole world.
For God, to whom I render sacred service with my spirit in connection with the good news about his Son, is my witness of how without ceasing I always mention you in my prayers,
begging that if at all possible I may now at last succeed in coming to you by God’s will.
For I am longing to see you, that I may impart some spiritual gift to you for you to be made firm;
or, rather, that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.
But I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that many times I have intended to come to you—but I have been prevented until now—in order that I might acquire some fruitage also among you just as among the rest of the nations.
Both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to wise and to senseless ones, I am a debtor;
so I am eager to declare the good news also to you there in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the good news; it is, in fact, God’s power for salvation to everyone having faith, to the Jew first and also to the Greek.
Therefore you are inexcusable, O man, whoever you are, if you judge; for when you judge another, you condemn yourself, because you who judge practice the same things.
Now we know that God’s judgment is in harmony with truth, against those who practice such things.
But do you suppose, O man, that while you judge those who practice such things and yet you do them, you will escape the judgment of God?
Or do you despise the riches of his kindness and forbearance and patience, because you do not know that God in his kindness is trying to lead you to repentance?
But according to your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath and of the revealing of God’s righteous judgment.
And he will pay back to each one according to his works:
everlasting life to those who are seeking glory and honor and incorruptibleness by endurance in work that is good;
however, for those who are contentious and who disobey the truth but obey unrighteousness, there will be wrath and anger.
There will be tribulation and distress on every person who works what is harmful, on the Jew first and also on the Greek;
but glory and honor and peace for everyone who works what is good, for the Jew first and also for the Greek.
For there is no partiality with God.
For all those who sinned without law will also perish without law; but all those who sinned under law will be judged by law.
For the hearers of law are not the ones righteous before God, but the doers of law will be declared righteous.
For when people of the nations, who do not have law, do by nature the things of the law, these people, although not having law, are a law to themselves.
They are the very ones who demonstrate the matter of the law to be written in their hearts, while their conscience is bearing witness with them, and by their own thoughts they are being accused or even excused.
This will take place in the day when God through Christ Jesus judges the secret things of mankind, according to the good news I declare.
What, then, is the advantage of the Jew, or what is the benefit of circumcision?
A great deal in every way. First of all, that they were entrusted with the sacred pronouncements of God.
What, then, is the case? If some lacked faith, will their lack of faith invalidate the faithfulness of God?
Certainly not! But let God be found true, even if every man be found a liar, just as it is written: “That you might be proved righteous in your words and might win when you are being judged.”
However, if our unrighteousness highlights God’s righteousness, what are we to say? God is not unjust when he expresses his wrath, is he? (I am speaking in human terms.)
By no means! How, otherwise, will God judge the world?
But if by my lie the truth of God has been made more prominent to his glory, why am I also being judged as a sinner?
And why not say, just as some men falsely claim that we say, “Let us do bad things that good things may come”? The judgment against those men is in harmony with justice.
What then? Are we in a better position? Not at all! For above we have made the charge that Jews as well as Greeks are all under sin;
just as it is written: “There is not a righteous man, not even one;
there is no one who has any insight; there is no one who searches for God.
All men have turned aside, all of them have become worthless; there is no one who shows kindness, not so much as one.”
“Their throat is an open grave; they have deceived with their tongues.” “Venom of asps is behind their lips.”
“And their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.”
“Their feet are swift to shed blood.”
“Ruin and misery are in their ways,
That being so, what will we say was gained by Abraham, our forefather according to the flesh?
For instance, if Abraham was declared righteous as a result of works, he would have reason to boast, but not with God.
For what does the scripture say? “Abraham put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
Now to the man who works, his pay is not counted as an undeserved kindness but as something owed to him.
On the other hand, to the man who does not work but puts faith in the One who declares the ungodly one righteous, his faith is counted as righteousness.
Just as David also speaks of the happiness of the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works:
“Happy are those whose lawless deeds have been pardoned and whose sins have been covered;
happy is the man whose sin Jehovah will by no means take into account.”
Does this happiness, then, only come to circumcised people or also to uncircumcised people? For we say: “Abraham’s faith was counted to him as righteousness.”
Under what circumstances, then, was it counted as righteousness? When he was circumcised or uncircumcised? He was not yet circumcised but was uncircumcised.
And he received a sign—namely, circumcision—as a seal of the righteousness by the faith he had while in his uncircumcised state, so that he might be the father of all those having faith while uncircumcised, in order for righteousness to be counted to them;
and so that he might be a father to circumcised offspring, not only to those who adhere to circumcision but also to those who walk orderly in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had while in the uncircumcised state.
For it was not through law that Abraham or his offspring had the promise that he should be heir of a world, but it was through righteousness by faith.
For if those who adhere to law are heirs, faith becomes useless and the promise has been abolished.
In reality the Law produces wrath, but where there is no law, neither is there any transgression.
That is why it is through faith, so that it might be according to undeserved kindness, in order for the promise to be sure to all his offspring, not only to those who adhere to the Law but also to those who adhere to the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.
Therefore, now that we have been declared righteous as a result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom we also have obtained access by faith into this undeserved kindness in which we now stand; and let us rejoice, based on hope of the glory of God.
Not only that, but let us rejoice while in tribulations, since we know that tribulation produces endurance;
endurance, in turn, an approved condition; the approved condition, in turn, hope,
and the hope does not lead to disappointment; because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the holy spirit, which was given to us.
For, indeed, while we were still weak, Christ died for ungodly men at the appointed time.
For hardly would anyone die for a righteous man; though perhaps for a good man someone may dare to die.
But God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
Much more, then, since we have now been declared righteous by his blood, will we be saved through him from wrath.
For if when we were enemies we became reconciled to God through the death of his Son, how much more we will be saved by his life, now that we have become reconciled.
Not only that, but we are also rejoicing in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
That is why, just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned—.
For sin was in the world before the Law, but sin is not charged against anyone when there is no law.
Nevertheless, death ruled as king from Adam down to Moses, even over those who had not sinned in the same way that Adam transgressed, who bears a resemblance to the one who was to come.
But the gift is not like the trespass. For if by one man’s trespass many died, how much more did the undeserved kindness of God and his free gift by the undeserved kindness of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to many!
Also, it is not the same with the free gift as with the way things worked through the one man who sinned. For the judgment after one trespass was condemnation, but the gift after many trespasses was a declaration of righteousness.
What are we to say then? Should we continue in sin so that undeserved kindness may increase?
Certainly not! Seeing that we died with reference to sin, how can we keep living any longer in it?
Or do you not know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
So we were buried with him through our baptism into his death, in order that just as Christ was raised up from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in a newness of life.
If we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we will certainly also be united with him in the likeness of his resurrection.
For we know that our old personality was nailed to the stake along with him in order for our sinful body to be made powerless, so that we should no longer go on being slaves to sin.
For the one who has died has been acquitted from his sin.
Moreover, if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
For we know that Christ, now that he has been raised up from the dead, dies no more; death is no longer master over him.
For the death that he died, he died with reference to sin once for all time, but the life that he lives, he lives with reference to God.
Likewise you, consider yourselves to be dead with reference to sin but living with reference to God by Christ Jesus.
Therefore, do not let sin continue to rule as king in your mortal bodies so that you should obey their desires.
Neither go on presenting your bodies to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those alive from the dead, also your bodies to God as weapons of righteousness.
For sin must not be master over you, seeing that you are not under law but under undeserved kindness.
What follows? Are we to commit a sin because we are not under law but under undeserved kindness? Certainly not!
Do you not know that if you present yourselves to anyone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey, either of sin leading to death or of obedience leading to righteousness?
Can it be that you do not know, brothers, (for I am speaking to those who know law) that the Law is master over a man as long as he lives?
For instance, a married woman is bound by law to her husband while he is alive; but if her husband dies, she is released from the law of her husband.
So, then, while her husband is living, she would be called an adulteress if she became another man’s. But if her husband dies, she is free from his law, so that she is not an adulteress if she becomes another man’s.
So, my brothers, you also were made dead to the Law through the body of the Christ, that you might become another’s, the one who was raised up from the dead, so that we should bear fruit to God.
For when we were living according to the flesh, the sinful passions that were awakened by the Law were at work in our bodies to produce fruit for death.
But now we have been released from the Law, because we have died to that which restrained us, in order that we might be slaves in a new sense by the spirit and not in the old sense by the written code.
What, then, are we to say? Is the Law sin? Certainly not! Really, I would not have come to know sin had it not been for the Law. For example, I would not have known covetousness if the Law had not said: “You must not covet.”
But sin, finding the opportunity afforded by the commandment, worked out in me covetousness of every sort, for apart from law sin was dead.
In fact, I was once alive apart from law. But when the commandment arrived, sin came to life again, but I died.
And the commandment that was to lead to life, this I found led to death.
For sin, finding the opportunity afforded by the commandment, seduced me and killed me through it.
So the Law in itself is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
Therefore, did what is good result in my death? Certainly not! But sin did, that it might be shown to be sin working out death in me through what is good, so that through the commandment sin might become far more sinful.
For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am fleshly, sold under sin.
For I do not understand what I am doing. For I do not practice what I wish, but I do what I hate.
However, if I do what I do not wish, I agree that the Law is fine.
Therefore, those in union with Christ Jesus have no condemnation.
For the law of the spirit that gives life in union with Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and of death.
What the Law was incapable of doing because it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and concerning sin, condemning sin in the flesh,
so that the righteous requirement of the Law might be fulfilled in us who walk, not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.
For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the spirit, on the things of the spirit.
For setting the mind on the flesh means death, but setting the mind on the spirit means life and peace;
because setting the mind on the flesh means enmity with God, for it is not in subjection to the law of God, nor, in fact, can it be.
So those who are in harmony with the flesh cannot please God.
However, you are in harmony, not with the flesh, but with the spirit, if God’s spirit truly dwells in you. But if anyone does not have Christ’s spirit, this person does not belong to him.
But if Christ is in union with you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness.
If, now, the spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, the one who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also make your mortal bodies alive through his spirit that resides in you.
So, then, brothers, we are under obligation, not to the flesh to live according to the flesh;
for if you live according to the flesh, you are sure to die; but if you put the practices of the body to death by the spirit, you will live.
For all who are led by God’s spirit are indeed God’s sons.
For you did not receive a spirit of slavery causing fear again, but you received a spirit of adoption as sons, by which spirit we cry out: “Abba, Father!”
The spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we are God’s children.
I am telling the truth in Christ; I am not lying, as my conscience bears witness with me in holy spirit,
that I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart.
For I could wish that I myself were separated from the Christ as the cursed one for the sake of my brothers, my relatives according to the flesh,
who are Israelites. To them belong the adoption as sons and the glory and the covenants and the giving of the Law and the sacred service and the promises.
To them the forefathers belong, and from them the Christ descended according to the flesh. God, who is over all, be praised forever. Amen.
However, it is not as though the word of God has failed. For not all who descend from Israel are really “Israel.”
Neither are they all children because they are Abraham’s offspring; rather, “What will be called your offspring will be through Isaac.”
That is, the children in the flesh are not really the children of God, but the children by the promise are counted as the offspring.
For the word of promise was as follows: “At this time I will come and Sarah will have a son.”
Not only then but also when Re·bekʹah conceived twins from the one man, Isaac our forefather;
for when they had not yet been born and had not practiced anything good or bad, so that God’s purpose respecting the choosing might continue dependent, not on works, but on the One who calls,
it was said to her: “The older will be the slave of the younger.”
Just as it is written: “I loved Jacob, but Eʹsau I hated.”
What are we to say, then? Is there injustice with God? Certainly not!
For he says to Moses: “I will show mercy to whomever I will show mercy, and I will show compassion to whomever I will show compassion.”
So, then, it depends, not on a person’s desire or on his effort, but on God, who has mercy.
Brothers, the goodwill of my heart and my supplication to God for them are indeed for their salvation.
For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not according to accurate knowledge.
For because of not knowing the righteousness of God but seeking to establish their own, they did not subject themselves to the righteousness of God.
For Christ is the end of the Law, so that everyone exercising faith may have righteousness.
For Moses writes about the righteousness that is by the Law: “The man who does these things will live by means of them.”
But the righteousness resulting from faith says: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ that is, to bring Christ down,
or, ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’ that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.”
But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart”; that is, “the word” of faith, which we are preaching.
For if you publicly declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, and exercise faith in your heart that God raised him up from the dead, you will be saved.
For with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.
For the scripture says: “No one who rests his faith on him will be disappointed.”
For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek. There is the same Lord over all, who is rich toward all those calling on him.
For “everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”
However, how will they call on him if they have not put faith in him? How, in turn, will they put faith in him about whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?
How, in turn, will they preach unless they have been sent out? Just as it is written: “How beautiful are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!”
Nevertheless, they did not all obey the good news. For Isaiah says: “Jehovah, who has put faith in the thing heard from us?”
I ask, then, God did not reject his people, did he? By no means! For I too am an Israelite, of the offspring of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin.
God did not reject his people, whom he first recognized. Do you not know what the scripture says in connection with E·liʹjah, as he pleads with God against Israel?
“Jehovah, they have killed your prophets, they have dug up your altars, and I alone am left, and now they are trying to take my life.”
Yet, what does the divine pronouncement say to him? “I have left for myself , men who have not bent the knee to Baʹal.”
So in the same way, at the present time also, there is a remnant according to a choosing through undeserved kindness.
Now if it is by undeserved kindness, it is no longer through works; otherwise, the undeserved kindness would no longer be undeserved kindness.
What, then? The very thing Israel is earnestly seeking he did not obtain, but the ones chosen obtained it. The rest had their senses dulled,
just as it is written: “God has given them a spirit of deep sleep, eyes that do not see and ears that do not hear, down to this very day.”
Also, David says: “Let their table become a snare and a trap and a stumbling block and a retribution for them.
Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see, and always make them bend their backs.”
So I ask, They did not stumble and fall completely, did they? Certainly not! But by their false step, there is salvation to people of the nations, to incite them to jealousy.
Now if their false step means riches to the world and their decrease means riches to people of the nations, how much more will their full number mean!
Now I speak to you who are people of the nations. Seeing that I am an apostle to the nations, I glorify my ministry
to see if I may in some way incite my own people to jealousy and save some from among them.
For if their being cast away means reconciliation for the world, what will the acceptance of them mean but life from the dead?
Further, if the part of the dough taken as firstfruits is holy, the entire batch is also holy; and if the root is holy, the branches are also.
Therefore, I appeal to you by the compassions of God, brothers, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, a sacred service with your power of reason.
And stop being molded by this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over, so that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
For through the undeserved kindness given to me, I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think, but to think so as to have a sound mind, each one as God has given to him a measure of faith.
For just as we have in one body many members, but the members do not all have the same function,
so we, although many, are one body in union with Christ, but individually we are members belonging to one another.
Since, then, we have gifts that differ according to the undeserved kindness given to us, if it is of prophecy, let us prophesy in proportion to our faith;
or if it is a ministry, let us be at this ministry; or the one who teaches, let him be at his teaching;
or the one who encourages, let him give encouragement; the one who distributes, let him do it liberally; the one who presides, let him do it diligently; the one who shows mercy, let him do it cheerfully.
Let your love be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is wicked; cling to what is good.
In brotherly love have tender affection for one another. In showing honor to one another, take the lead.
Be industrious, not lazy. Be aglow with the spirit. Slave for Jehovah.
Rejoice in the hope. Endure under tribulation. Persevere in prayer.
Share with the holy ones according to their needs. Follow the course of hospitality.
Keep on blessing those who persecute; bless and do not curse.
Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep.
Have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves; do not set your mind on lofty things, but be led along with the lowly things. Do not become wise in your own eyes.
Let every person be in subjection to the superior authorities, for there is no authority except by God; the existing authorities stand placed in their relative positions by God.
Therefore, whoever opposes the authority has taken a stand against the arrangement of God; those who have taken a stand against it will bring judgment against themselves.
For those rulers are an object of fear, not to the good deed, but to the bad. Do you want to be free of fear of the authority? Keep doing good, and you will have praise from it;
for it is God’s minister to you for your good. But if you are doing what is bad, be in fear, for it is not without purpose that it bears the sword. It is God’s minister, an avenger to express wrath against the one practicing what is bad.
There is therefore compelling reason for you to be in subjection, not only on account of that wrath but also on account of your conscience.
That is why you are also paying taxes; for they are God’s public servants constantly serving this very purpose.
Render to all their dues: to the one who calls for the tax, the tax; to the one who calls for the tribute, the tribute; to the one who calls for fear, such fear; to the one who calls for honor, such honor.
Do not owe anything to anyone except to love one another; for whoever loves his fellow man has fulfilled the law.
For the law code, “You must not commit adultery, you must not murder, you must not steal, you must not covet,” and whatever other commandment there is, is summed up in this saying: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
Love does not work evil to one’s neighbor; therefore, love is the law’s fulfillment.
And do this because you know the season, that it is already the hour for you to awake from sleep, for now our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers.
The night is well along; the day has drawn near. Let us therefore throw off the works belonging to darkness and let us put on the weapons of the light.
Let us walk decently as in the daytime, not in wild parties and drunkenness, not in immoral intercourse and brazen conduct, not in strife and jealousy.
But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not be planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.
Welcome the man having weaknesses in his faith, but do not pass judgment on differing opinions.
One man has faith to eat everything, but the man who is weak eats only vegetables.
Let the one eating not look down on the one not eating, and let the one not eating not judge the one eating, for God has welcomed him.
Who are you to judge the servant of another? To his own master he stands or falls. Indeed, he will be made to stand, for Jehovah can make him stand.
One man judges one day as above another; another judges one day the same as all others; let each one be fully convinced in his own mind.
The one who observes the day observes it to Jehovah. Also, the one who eats, eats to Jehovah, for he gives thanks to God; and the one who does not eat does not eat to Jehovah, and yet gives thanks to God.
Not one of us, in fact, lives with regard to himself only, and no one dies with regard to himself only.
For if we live, we live to Jehovah, and if we die, we die to Jehovah. So both if we live and if we die, we belong to Jehovah.
For to this end Christ died and came to life again, so that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.
But why do you judge your brother? Or why do you also look down on your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of God.
For it is written: “‘As surely as I live,’ says Jehovah, ‘to me every knee will bend, and every tongue will make open acknowledgment to God.’”
So, then, each of us will render an account for himself to God.
Therefore, let us not judge one another any longer but, rather, be determined not to put a stumbling block or an obstacle before a brother.
I know and am convinced in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself; only where a man considers something to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
For if your brother is being offended because of food, you are no longer walking according to love. Do not by your food ruin that one for whom Christ died.
Therefore, do not let the good you do be spoken of as bad.
We, though, who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong, and not to be pleasing ourselves.
Let each of us please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.
For even the Christ did not please himself, but just as it is written: “The reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me.”
For all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction, so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.
Now may the God who supplies endurance and comfort grant you to have among yourselves the same mental attitude that Christ Jesus had,
so that unitedly you may with one voice glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So welcome one another, just as the Christ also welcomed you, with glory to God in view.
For I tell you that Christ became a minister of those who are circumcised in behalf of God’s truthfulness, so as to verify the promises He made to their forefathers,
and that the nations might glorify God for his mercy. Just as it is written: “That is why I will openly acknowledge you among the nations, and to your name I will sing praises.”
And again he says: “Be glad, you nations, with his people.”
And again: “Praise Jehovah, all you nations, and let all the peoples praise him.”
And again Isaiah says: “There will be the root of Jesʹse, the one arising to rule nations; on him nations will rest their hope.”
May the God who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace by your trusting in him, so that you may abound in hope with power of holy spirit.
Now I myself am convinced about you, my brothers, that you yourselves are also full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and that you are able to admonish one another.
However, I have written to you more outspokenly on some points, so as to give you another reminder, because of the undeserved kindness given to me from God
for me to be a public servant of Christ Jesus to the nations. I am engaging in the holy work of the good news of God, so that these nations might be an acceptable offering, sanctified with holy spirit.
I am introducing to you Phoeʹbe, our sister, who is a minister of the congregation that is in Cenʹchre·ae,
so that you may welcome her in the Lord in a way worthy of the holy ones and give her whatever help she may need, for she herself also proved to be a defender of many, including me.
Give my greetings to Prisʹca and Aqʹui·la, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
who have risked their own necks for me and to whom not only I but also all the congregations of the nations give thanks.
Also greet the congregation that is in their house. Greet my beloved E·paeʹne·tus, who is a firstfruits of Asia for Christ.
Greet Mary, who has worked hard for you.
Greet An·dronʹi·cus and Juʹni·as, my relatives and fellow prisoners, who are men well-known to the apostles and who have been in union with Christ longer than I have.
Give my greetings to Am·pli·aʹtus, my beloved in the Lord.
Greet Ur·baʹnus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my beloved Staʹchys.
Greet A·pelʹles, the approved one in Christ. Greet those from the household of A·ris·tobʹu·lus.
Greet He·roʹdi·on, my relative. Greet those from the household of Nar·cisʹsus who are in the Lord.
Greet Try·phaeʹna and Try·phoʹsa, women who are working hard in the Lord. Greet Perʹsis, our beloved one, for she has worked hard in the Lord.
Greet Ruʹfus, the chosen one in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
Greet A·synʹcri·tus, Phleʹgon, Herʹmes, Patʹro·bas, Herʹmas, and the brothers with them.
Greet Phi·lolʹo·gus and Julia, Neʹreus and his sister, and O·lymʹpas, and all the holy ones with them.
Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the congregations of the Christ greet you.
Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by God’s will, and Sosʹthe·nes our brother,
to the congregation of God that is in Corinth, to you who have been sanctified in union with Christ Jesus, called to be holy ones, together with all those everywhere who are calling on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I always thank my God for you in view of the undeserved kindness of God given to you in Christ Jesus;
because in everything you have been enriched in him, in full ability to speak and in full knowledge,
just as the witness about the Christ has been made firm among you,
so that you do not lack in any gift at all, while you are eagerly waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He will also make you firm to the end so that you may be open to no accusation in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God is faithful, by whom you were called into fellowship with his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Now I urge you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you should all speak in agreement and that there should be no divisions among you, but that you may be completely united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.
For some from the house of Chloʹe have informed me regarding you, my brothers, that there are dissensions among you.
What I mean is this, that each one of you says: “I belong to Paul,” “But I to A·polʹlos,” “But I to Ceʹphas,” “But I to Christ.”
Is the Christ divided? Paul was not executed on the stake for you, was he? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul?
I thank God that I baptized none of you except Crisʹpus and Gaʹius,
so that no one may say that you were baptized in my name.
Yes, I also baptized the household of Stephʹa·nas. As for the rest, I do not know whether I baptized anyone else.
So when I came to you, brothers, I did not come with extravagant speech or wisdom declaring the sacred secret of God to you.
For I decided not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ, and him executed on the stake.
And I came to you in weakness and in fear and with much trembling;
and my speech and what I preached were not with persuasive words of wisdom but with a demonstration of spirit and power,
so that your faith might be, not in men’s wisdom, but in God’s power.
Now we speak wisdom among those who are mature, but not the wisdom of this system of things nor that of the rulers of this system of things, who are to come to nothing.
But we speak God’s wisdom in a sacred secret, the hidden wisdom, which God foreordained before the systems of things for our glory.
It is this wisdom that none of the rulers of this system of things came to know, for if they had known it, they would not have executed the glorious Lord.
But just as it is written: “Eye has not seen and ear has not heard, nor have there been conceived in the heart of man the things that God has prepared for those who love him.”
For it is to us God has revealed them through his spirit, for the spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God.
For who among men knows the things of a man except the man’s spirit within him? So, too, no one has come to know the things of God except the spirit of God.
Now we received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit that is from God, so that we might know the things that have been kindly given us by God.
These things we also speak, not with words taught by human wisdom, but with those taught by the spirit, as we explain spiritual matters with spiritual words.
But a physical man does not accept the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; and he cannot get to know them, because they are examined spiritually.
However, the spiritual man examines all things, but he himself is not examined by any man.
For “who has come to know the mind of Jehovah, so that he may instruct him?” But we do have the mind of Christ.
So, brothers, I was not able to speak to you as to spiritual men, but as to fleshly men, as to infants in Christ.
I fed you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet strong enough. In fact, neither are you strong enough now,
for you are still fleshly. Since there are jealousy and strife among you, are you not fleshly and are you not walking as men do?
For when one says, “I belong to Paul,” but another says, “I to A·polʹlos,” are you not acting like mere men?
What, then, is A·polʹlos? Yes, what is Paul? Ministers through whom you became believers, just as the Lord granted each one.
I planted, A·polʹlos watered, but God kept making it grow,
so that neither is the one who plants anything nor is the one who waters, but God who makes it grow.
Now the one who plants and the one who waters are one, but each person will receive his own reward according to his own work.
For we are God’s fellow workers. You are God’s field under cultivation, God’s building.
According to the undeserved kindness of God that was given to me, I laid a foundation as a skilled master builder, but someone else is building on it. But let each one keep watching how he is building on it.
For no one can lay any other foundation than what is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Now if anyone builds on the foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or straw,
each one’s work will be shown for what it is, for the day will show it up, because it will be revealed by means of fire, and the fire itself will prove what sort of work each one has built.
If anyone’s work that he has built on it remains, he will receive a reward;
if anyone’s work is burned up, he will suffer loss, but he himself will be saved; yet, if so, it will be as through fire.
Do you not know that you yourselves are God’s temple and that the spirit of God dwells in you?
A man should regard us as attendants of Christ and stewards of God’s sacred secrets.
In this regard, what is expected of stewards is that they be found faithful.
Now to me it is of very little importance to be examined by you or by a human tribunal. In fact, I do not even examine myself.
For I am not conscious of anything against myself. But by this I am not proved righteous; the one who examines me is Jehovah.
Therefore, do not judge anything before the due time, until the Lord comes. He will bring the secret things of darkness to light and make known the intentions of the hearts, and then each one will receive his praise from God.
Now, brothers, these things I have applied to myself and A·polʹlos for your good, that through us you may learn the rule: “Do not go beyond the things that are written,” so that you may not be puffed up with pride, favoring one against the other.
For who makes you different from another? Indeed, what do you have that you did not receive? If, in fact, you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not receive it?
Are you already satisfied? Are you already rich? Have you begun ruling as kings without us? I really wish that you had begun ruling as kings, so that we also might rule with you as kings.
For it seems to me that God has put us the apostles last on exhibition as men condemned to death, because we have become a theatrical spectacle to the world, and to angels and to men.
We are fools because of Christ, but you are discreet in Christ; we are weak, but you are strong; you are held in honor, but we in dishonor.
Down to this very hour we continue to hunger and thirst and to be poorly clothed and to be beaten and to be homeless
and to toil, working with our own hands. When insulted, we bless; when persecuted, we patiently endure;
when slandered, we answer mildly; we have become as the refuse of the world, the offscouring of all things, until now.
I am writing these things, not to put you to shame, but to admonish you as my beloved children.
For though you may have , guardians in Christ, you certainly do not have many fathers; for in Christ Jesus, I have become your father through the good news.
I urge you, therefore, become imitators of me.
Actually sexual immorality is reported among you, and such immorality as is not even found among the nations—of a man living with his father’s wife.
And are you proud of it? Should you not rather mourn, so that the man who committed this deed should be taken away from your midst?
Although absent in body, I am present in spirit, and I have already judged the man who has done this, as if I were actually with you.
When you are gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus, and knowing that I am with you in spirit along with the power of our Lord Jesus,
you must hand such a man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.
Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven ferments the whole batch of dough?
Clear away the old leaven so that you may be a new batch, inasmuch as you are free from ferment. For, indeed, Christ our Passover lamb has been sacrificed.
So, then, let us keep the festival, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of badness and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
In my letter I wrote you to stop keeping company with sexually immoral people,
not meaning entirely with the sexually immoral people of this world or the greedy people or extortioners or idolaters. Otherwise, you would actually have to get out of the world.
But now I am writing you to stop keeping company with anyone called a brother who is sexually immoral or a greedy person or an idolater or a reviler or a drunkard or an extortioner, not even eating with such a man.
For what do I have to do with judging those outside? Do you not judge those inside,
while God judges those outside? “Remove the wicked person from among yourselves.”
Does any one of you who has a dispute with another dare to go to court before unrighteous men, and not before the holy ones?
Or do you not know that the holy ones will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you not competent to try very trivial matters?
Do you not know that we will judge angels? Then why not matters of this life?
If, then, you do have matters of this life to be tried, is it the men looked down on in the congregation whom you assign as judges?
I am speaking to move you to shame. Is there not one wise man among you who is able to judge between his brothers?
Instead, brother goes to court against brother, and before unbelievers at that!
Really, it is already a defeat for you when you have lawsuits with one another. Why not rather let yourselves be wronged? Why do you not rather let yourselves be defrauded?
Instead, you wrong and defraud, and your brothers at that!
Or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled. Those who are sexually immoral, idolaters, adulterers, men who submit to homosexual acts, men who practice homosexuality,
thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers, and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom.
And yet that is what some of you were. But you have been washed clean; you have been sanctified; you have been declared righteous in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and with the spirit of our God.
All things are lawful for me, but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful for me, but I will not let myself be controlled by anything.
Food is for the stomach and the stomach is for food, but God will bring both of them to nothing. The body is not for sexual immorality but for the Lord, and the Lord is for the body.
But God raised up the Lord and will also raise us up out of death through his power.
Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Should I, then, take the members of the Christ away and join them to a prostitute? By no means!
Do you not know that anyone who is joined to a prostitute is one body with her? For “the two,” says he, “will be one flesh.”
Now concerning the things about which you wrote, it is better for a man not to touch a woman;
but because of the prevalence of sexual immorality, let each man have his own wife and each woman have her own husband.
Let the husband give to his wife her due, and let the wife also do likewise to her husband.
The wife does not have authority over her own body, but her husband does; likewise, the husband does not have authority over his own body, but his wife does.
Do not deprive each other except by mutual consent for an appointed time, so that you may devote time to prayer and may come together again, in order that Satan may not keep tempting you for your lack of self-control.
However, I say this by way of concession, not as a command.
But I wish all men were as I am. Nevertheless, each one has his own gift from God, one in this way, another in that way.
Now I say to those who are unmarried and to the widows that it is better for them if they remain as I am.
But if they do not have self-control, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to be inflamed with passion.
To the married people I give instructions, not I but the Lord, that a wife should not separate from her husband.
But if she does separate, let her remain unmarried or else be reconciled with her husband; and a husband should not leave his wife.
But to the others I say, yes, I, not the Lord: If any brother has an unbelieving wife and she is agreeable to staying with him, let him not leave her;
and if a woman has an unbelieving husband and he is agreeable to staying with her, let her not leave her husband.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in relation to his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in relation to the brother; otherwise, your children would be unclean, but now they are holy.
But if the unbelieving one chooses to depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not bound under such circumstances, but God has called you to peace.
For wife, how do you know whether you will save your husband? Or, husband, how do you know whether you will save your wife?
Now concerning food offered to idols: We know we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
If anyone thinks he knows something, he does not yet know it as he should know it.
But if anyone loves God, this one is known by him.
Now concerning the eating of food offered to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world and that there is no God but one.
For even though there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, just as there are many “gods” and many “lords,”
there is actually to us one God, the Father, from whom all things are and we for him; and there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things are and we through him.
However, not all have this knowledge. But some, because of their former association with the idol, eat food as something sacrificed to an idol, and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
But food will not bring us nearer to God; we are no worse off if we do not eat, nor better off if we eat.
But keep watching that your right to choose does not somehow become a stumbling block to those who are weak.
For if anyone should see you who have knowledge having a meal in an idol temple, will not the conscience of that one who is weak be emboldened to the point of eating food offered to idols?
So by your knowledge the man who is weak is being ruined, your brother for whose sake Christ died.
When you sin against your brothers in this way and wound their weak conscience, you are sinning against Christ.
That is why if food makes my brother stumble, I will never again eat meat at all, so that I will not make my brother stumble.
Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord?
Even if I am not an apostle to others, I most certainly am to you! For you are the seal confirming my apostleship in the Lord.
My defense to those who examine me is as follows:
We have the right to eat and drink, do we not?
We have the right to be accompanied by a believing wife, as the rest of the apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Ceʹphas, do we not?
Or is it only Barʹna·bas and I who do not have the right to refrain from working for a living?
What soldier ever serves at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? Or who shepherds a flock and does not partake of some of the milk of the flock?
Am I saying these things from a human viewpoint? Or does not the Law also say these things?
For it is written in the Law of Moses: “You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out the grain.” Is it bulls that God is concerned about?
Or is it actually for our sakes that he says it? It was really written for our sakes, because the man who plows and the man who threshes ought to do so in the hope of receiving a share.
If we have sown spiritual things among you, is it too much if we reap material support from you?
If other men have this rightful claim over you, do we not have it much more so? Nevertheless, we have not made use of this right, but we are enduring all things so that we might not in any way hinder the good news about the Christ.
Do you not know that the men performing sacred duties eat the things of the temple, and that those regularly serving at the altar receive a share from the altar?
In this way, too, the Lord commanded for those proclaiming the good news to live by means of the good news.
But I have not made use of a single one of these provisions. Indeed, I have not written these things so that this would be done for me, for it would be better to die than—no man will take away my grounds for boasting!
Now if I am declaring the good news, it is no reason for me to boast, for necessity is laid upon me. Really, woe to me if I do not declare the good news!
Now I want you to know, brothers, that our forefathers were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea
and all got baptized into Moses by means of the cloud and of the sea,
and all ate the same spiritual food
and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they used to drink from the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock meant the Christ.
Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them, for they were struck down in the wilderness.
Now these things became examples for us, in order for us not to desire injurious things, as they desired them.
Neither become idolaters, as some of them did; just as it is written: “The people sat down to eat and drink. Then they got up to have a good time.”
Neither let us practice sexual immorality, as some of them committed sexual immorality, only to fall, , of them in one day.
Neither let us put Jehovah to the test, as some of them put him to the test, only to perish by the serpents.
Neither be murmurers, as some of them murmured, only to perish by the destroyer.
Now these things happened to them as examples, and they were written for a warning to us upon whom the ends of the systems of things have come.
So let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.
No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men. But God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.
Therefore, my beloved ones, flee from idolatry.
I speak as to men with discernment; judge for yourselves what I say.
The cup of blessing that we bless, is it not a sharing in the blood of the Christ? The loaf that we break, is it not a sharing in the body of the Christ?
Become imitators of me, just as I am of Christ.
I commend you because in all things you remember me and you are holding fast the traditions just as I handed them on to you.
But I want you to know that the head of every man is the Christ; in turn, the head of a woman is the man; in turn, the head of the Christ is God.
Every man who prays or prophesies with something on his head shames his head;
but every woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered shames her head, for it is one and the same as if she were a woman with a shaved head.
For if a woman does not cover herself, she should have her hair cut off; but if it is disgraceful for a woman to have her hair cut off or shaved, she should be covered.
For a man should not have his head covered, as he is God’s image and glory, but the woman is man’s glory.
For man did not come from woman, but woman came from man.
And what is more, man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man.
That is why the woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels.
Besides, in connection with the Lord, neither is woman separate from man nor is man separate from woman.
For just as the woman is from the man, so also the man is through the woman; but all things are from God.
Judge for yourselves: Is it fitting for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered?
Does not nature itself teach you that long hair is a dishonor to a man,
but if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her? For her hair is given to her instead of a covering.
However, if anyone wants to argue in favor of some other custom, we have no other, nor do the congregations of God.
Now concerning the spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be uninformed.
You know that when you were people of the nations, you were influenced and led astray to those voiceless idols, following wherever they might lead you.
Now I would have you know that nobody when speaking by God’s spirit says: “Jesus is accursed!” and nobody can say: “Jesus is Lord!” except by holy spirit.
Now there are different gifts, but there is the same spirit;
and there are different ministries, and yet there is the same Lord;
and there are different activities, and yet it is the same God who performs them all in everyone.
But the manifestation of the spirit is given to each one for a beneficial purpose.
For to one is given speech of wisdom through the spirit, to another speech of knowledge according to the same spirit,
to another faith by the same spirit, to another gifts of healing by that one spirit,
to yet another operations of powerful works, to another prophesying, to another discernment of inspired expressions, to another different tongues, and to another interpretation of tongues.
But all these operations are performed by the very same spirit, distributing to each one respectively just as it wills.
For just as the body is one but has many members, and all the members of that body, although many, are one body, so too is the Christ.
For by one spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free, and we were all made to drink one spirit.
For, indeed, the body is made up not of one member but of many.
If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I am no part of the body,” that does not make it no part of the body.
And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I am no part of the body,” that does not make it no part of the body.
If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels but do not have love, I have become a clanging gong or a clashing cymbal.
And if I have the gift of prophecy and understand all the sacred secrets and all knowledge, and if I have all the faith so as to move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing.
And if I give all my belongings to feed others, and if I hand over my body so that I may boast, but do not have love, I do not benefit at all.
Love is patient and kind. Love is not jealous. It does not brag, does not get puffed up,
does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the injury.
It does not rejoice over unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth.
It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
Love never fails. But if there are gifts of prophecy, they will be done away with; if there are tongues, they will cease; if there is knowledge, it will be done away with.
For we have partial knowledge and we prophesy partially,
but when what is complete comes, what is partial will be done away with.
When I was a child, I used to speak as a child, to think as a child, to reason as a child; but now that I have become a man, I have done away with the traits of a child.
For now we see in hazy outline by means of a metal mirror, but then it will be face-to-face. At present I know partially, but then I will know accurately, just as I am accurately known.
Now, however, these three remain: faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love.
Pursue love, yet keep striving for the spiritual gifts, but preferably that you may prophesy.
For the one who speaks in a tongue speaks, not to men, but to God, for no one listens, but he speaks sacred secrets by the spirit.
However, the one who prophesies builds up and encourages and consoles men by his speech.
The one who speaks in a tongue builds up himself, but the one who prophesies builds up a congregation.
Now I would like for all of you to speak in tongues, but I prefer that you prophesy. Indeed, the one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks in tongues, unless he interprets, so that the congregation may be built up.
But at this time, brothers, if I should come speaking to you in tongues, what good would I do you unless I spoke to you either with a revelation or with knowledge or with a prophecy or with a teaching?
It is the same with the inanimate things that produce sound, whether a flute or a harp. Unless there is an interval to the tones, how can what is being played on the flute or on the harp be recognized?
For if the trumpet sounds an indistinct call, who will get ready for battle?
In the same way, unless you with the tongue use speech that is easily understood, how will anyone know what is being said? You will, in fact, be speaking into the air.
It may be that there are many kinds of speech in the world, and yet no kind is without meaning.
For if I do not understand the sense of the speech, I will be a foreigner to the one speaking, and the one speaking will be a foreigner to me.
So also with you, since you eagerly desire the gifts of the spirit, seek to abound in gifts that will build up the congregation.
Therefore, let the one who speaks in a tongue pray that he may interpret.
For if I am praying in a tongue, it is my gift of the spirit that is praying, but my mind is unproductive.
What is to be done, then? I will pray with the gift of the spirit, but I will also pray with my mind. I will sing praise with the gift of the spirit, but I will also sing praise with my mind.
Otherwise, if you offer praise with a gift of the spirit, how will the ordinary person in your midst say “Amen” to your giving of thanks, since he does not know what you are saying?
Now I remind you, brothers, of the good news that I declared to you, which you also accepted, and for which you have taken your stand.
Through it you are also being saved if you hold firmly to the good news I declared to you, unless you became believers for nothing.
For among the first things I handed on to you was what I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures;
and that he was buried, yes, that he was raised up on the third day according to the Scriptures;
and that he appeared to Ceʹphas, and then to the Twelve.
After that he appeared to more than  brothers at one time, most of whom are still with us, though some have fallen asleep in death.
After that he appeared to James, then to all the apostles.
But last of all he appeared also to me as if to one born prematurely.
For I am the least of the apostles, and I am not worthy of being called an apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of God.
But by God’s undeserved kindness I am what I am. And his undeserved kindness to me was not in vain, but I labored more than all of them; yet it was not I, but the undeserved kindness of God that is with me.
Whether, then, it is I or they, this is the way we preach, and this is the way you believed.
Now if it is being preached that Christ has been raised from the dead, how is it that some among you say there is no resurrection of the dead?
If, indeed, there is no resurrection of the dead, then Christ has not been raised up.
But if Christ has not been raised up, our preaching is certainly in vain, and your faith is also in vain.
Moreover, we are also found to be false witnesses of God, because we have given witness against God by saying that he raised up the Christ, whom he did not raise up if the dead are really not to be raised up.
For if the dead are not to be raised up, neither has Christ been raised up.
Now concerning the collection for the holy ones, you may follow the directions I gave to the congregations of Ga·laʹti·a.
On the first day of every week, each of you should set something aside according to his own means, so that collections will not take place when I arrive.
But when I get there, I will send the men you approve of in your letters to take your kind gift to Jerusalem.
However, if it seems advisable for me to go there also, they will go there with me.
But I will come to you when I have gone through Mac·e·doʹni·a, for I will be going through Mac·e·doʹni·a;
and perhaps I will stay or even spend the winter with you, so that you may accompany me partway to where I may be going.
For I do not want to see you now just in passing, since I hope to spend some time with you, if Jehovah permits.
But I am remaining in Ephʹe·sus until the Festival of Pentecost,
because a large door that leads to activity has been opened to me, but there are many opposers.
Now if Timothy arrives, make sure that he has nothing to fear while among you, for he is performing the work of Jehovah, just as I am.
Therefore, let no one look down on him. Send him on his way in peace, so that he may come to me, for I am waiting for him together with the brothers.
Now concerning A·polʹlos our brother, I strongly urged him to come to you with the brothers. It was not his intention to come now, but he will come when he has the opportunity.
Stay awake, stand firm in the faith, carry on in a manly way, grow mighty.
Let everything you do be done with love.
Now I urge you, brothers: You know that the household of Stephʹa·nas is the firstfruits of A·chaʹia and that they devoted themselves to ministering to the holy ones.
May you also keep submitting yourselves to people like that and to all those cooperating and working hard.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy our brother, to the congregation of God that is in Corinth, including all the holy ones who are in all A·chaʹia:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort,
who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from God.
For just as the sufferings for the Christ abound in us, so the comfort we receive through the Christ also abounds.
Now if we face trials, it is for your comfort and salvation; and if we are being comforted, it is for your comfort, which acts to help you to endure the same sufferings that we also suffer.
And our hope for you is unwavering, knowing as we do that just as you share in the sufferings, so you will also share in the comfort.
For we do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the tribulation we experienced in the province of Asia. We were under extreme pressure beyond our own strength, so that we were very uncertain even of our lives.
In fact, we felt that we had received the sentence of death. This was so that we would trust, not in ourselves, but in the God who raises up the dead.
From such a great risk of death he did rescue us and will rescue us, and our hope is in him that he will also continue to rescue us.
You also can help us by your supplication for us, in order that many may give thanks in our behalf for the favor we receive in answer to the prayers of many.
For the thing we boast of is this, our conscience bears witness that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially toward you, with holiness and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but with God’s undeserved kindness.
For we are really not writing you about anything except what you can read and understand, and I hope you will continue to understand these things fully,
For I have made up my mind not to come to you again in sadness.
For if I make you sad, who will be there to cheer me up except the one I saddened?
I wrote what I did, so that when I come I may not be saddened by those over whom I ought to rejoice, because I have confidence that what brings me joy brings all of you the same joy.
For out of much tribulation and anguish of heart I wrote you with many tears, not to sadden you, but to let you know the depth of love I have for you.
Now if anyone has caused sadness, he has saddened, not me, but all of you to an extent—not to be too harsh in what I say.
This rebuke given by the majority is sufficient for such a man;
now you should instead kindly forgive and comfort him, so that he may not be overwhelmed by excessive sadness.
I therefore exhort you to confirm your love for him.
For this is also why I wrote to you: to determine whether you would give proof of your obedience in all things.
If you forgive anyone for anything, I do also. In fact, whatever I have forgiven (if I have forgiven anything) has been for your sake in Christ’s sight,
so that we may not be overreached by Satan, for we are not ignorant of his designs.
Now when I arrived in Troʹas to declare the good news about the Christ and a door was opened to me in the Lord,
my spirit felt no relief because of not finding Titus my brother. So I said good-bye to them and departed for Mac·e·doʹni·a.
Are we starting to recommend ourselves again? Or do we need, like some men, letters of recommendation to you or from you?
You yourselves are our letter, inscribed on our hearts and known and being read by all mankind.
For you are shown to be a letter of Christ written by us as ministers, inscribed not with ink but with the spirit of a living God, not on stone tablets but on fleshly tablets, on hearts.
We have this sort of confidence toward God through the Christ.
Not that we of ourselves are adequately qualified to consider that anything comes from us, but our being adequately qualified comes from God,
who has indeed adequately qualified us to be ministers of a new covenant, not of a written code, but of spirit; for the written code condemns to death, but the spirit makes alive.
Now if the code that administers death and that was engraved in letters on stones came with such glory that the sons of Israel could not gaze at the face of Moses because of the glory of his face, a glory that was to be done away with,
why should the administering of the spirit not be with even greater glory?
For if the code administering condemnation was glorious, how much more glorious would be the administering of righteousness!
In fact, even what had once been made glorious has been stripped of glory because of the glory that excels it.
For if what was to be done away with was brought in with glory, how much greater would be the glory of what remains!
Since we have such a hope, we are using great freeness of speech,
and not doing what Moses did when he would put a veil over his face so that the sons of Israel might not gaze intently at the end of what was to be done away with.
Therefore, since we have this ministry through the mercy that was shown us, we do not give up.
But we have renounced the shameful, underhanded things, not walking with cunning or adulterating the word of God; but by making the truth manifest, we recommend ourselves to every human conscience in the sight of God.
If, in fact, the good news we declare is veiled, it is veiled among those who are perishing,
among whom the god of this system of things has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, so that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine through.
For we are preaching, not about ourselves, but about Jesus Christ as Lord and ourselves as your slaves for Jesus’ sake.
For God is the one who said: “Let the light shine out of darkness,” and he has shone on our hearts to illuminate them with the glorious knowledge of God by the face of Christ.
However, we have this treasure in earthen vessels, so that the power beyond what is normal may be God’s and not from us.
We are hard-pressed in every way, but not cramped beyond movement; we are perplexed, but not absolutely with no way out;
we are persecuted, but not abandoned; we are knocked down, but not destroyed.
Always we endure in our body the death-dealing treatment that Jesus suffered, that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our body.
For we who live are ever being brought face-to-face with death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our mortal flesh.
So death is at work in us, but life in you.
Now because we have the same spirit of faith as that of which it is written: “I exercised faith, therefore I spoke”; we too exercise faith and therefore we speak,
For we know that if our earthly house, this tent, should be torn down, we are to have a building from God, a house not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens.
For in this house we do indeed groan, earnestly desiring to put on the one for us from heaven,
so that when we do put it on, we will not be found naked.
In fact, we who are in this tent groan, being weighed down, because we do not want to put this one off, but we want to put the other on, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
Now the one who prepared us for this very thing is God, who gave us the spirit as a token of what is to come.
So we are always of good courage and know that while we have our home in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
for we are walking by faith, not by sight.
But we are of good courage and would prefer to be absent from the body and to make our home with the Lord.
So whether at home with him or absent from him, we make it our aim to be acceptable to him.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of the Christ, so that each one may be repaid according to the things he has practiced while in the body, whether good or bad.
Therefore, since we know the fear of the Lord, we keep persuading men, but we are well-known to God. However, I hope that we are well-known also to your consciences.
We are not recommending ourselves to you again but giving you an incentive to boast about us, so that you may be able to answer those who boast over the outward appearance but not over what is in the heart.
For if we were out of our mind, it was for God; if we are sound in mind, it is for you.
Working together with him, we also urge you not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose.
For he says: “In an acceptable time I heard you, and in a day of salvation I helped you.” Look! Now is the especially acceptable time. Look! Now is the day of salvation.
In no way are we giving any cause for stumbling, so that no fault may be found with our ministry;
but in every way we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers, by the endurance of much, by tribulations, by times of need, by difficulties,
by beatings, by imprisonments, by riots, by hard work, by sleepless nights, by times without food;
by purity, by knowledge, by patience, by kindness, by holy spirit, by love free from hypocrisy,
by truthful speech, by God’s power; through the weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left,
through glory and dishonor, through bad report and good report. We are regarded as deceivers and yet we are truthful,
as unknown and yet we are recognized, as dying and yet look! we live, as punished and yet not handed over to death,
as sorrowing but ever rejoicing, as poor but making many rich, as having nothing and yet possessing all things.
We have opened our mouth to speak to you, Corinthians, and we have opened wide our heart.
We are not restricted in our affections for you, but you are restricted in your own tender affections for us.
So in response—I speak as to my children—you too open your hearts wide.
Therefore, since we have these promises, beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Make room for us in your hearts. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one.
I do not say this to condemn you. For I have said before that you are in our hearts to die together and to live together.
I have great freeness of speech toward you. I have great boasting in regard to you. I am filled with comfort; I am overflowing with joy in all our affliction.
In fact, when we arrived in Mac·e·doʹni·a, our bodies got no relief, but we continued to be afflicted in every way—there were fights on the outside, fears within.
But God, who comforts those who are downhearted, comforted us by the presence of Titus;
and not only by his presence but also by the comfort he received because of you, as he reported back to us about your longing for me, your deep sorrow, and your earnest concern for me; so I rejoiced even more.
For even if I saddened you by my letter, I do not regret it. Even if I did at first regret it (seeing that the letter saddened you, though only for a little while),
now I rejoice, not because you were just saddened, but because you were saddened into repenting. For you were saddened in a godly way, so that you suffered no harm because of us.
For sadness in a godly way produces repentance leading to salvation, leaving no regret; but the sadness of the world produces death.
For see what a great earnestness your being saddened in a godly way produced in you, yes, clearing of yourselves, yes, indignation, yes, fear, yes, earnest desire, yes, zeal, yes, righting of the wrong! In every respect you demonstrated yourselves to be pure in this matter.
Although I wrote to you, I did not do it for the one who did the wrong, nor for the one who was wronged, but so that your earnestness for us might be made evident among you in the sight of God.
That is why we have been comforted.
Now we want you to know, brothers, about the undeserved kindness of God that has been granted to the congregations of Mac·e·doʹni·a.
During a great test under affliction, their abundance of joy and their deep poverty made the riches of their generosity abound.
For it was according to their means, yes, I testify, it was even beyond their means,
while they on their own initiative kept earnestly begging us for the privilege of kindly giving, to have a share in the relief ministry for the holy ones.
And not merely as we had hoped, but first they gave themselves to the Lord and to us through God’s will.
So we encouraged Titus that, just as he had initiated this work among you, he should also complete this same kind giving on your part.
Nevertheless, just as you abound in everything, in faith and word and knowledge and all earnestness and in our love for you, may you also abound in this kind giving.
I am saying this, not to command you, but to make you aware of the earnestness of others and to test the genuineness of your love.
For you know the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, that although he was rich, he became poor for your sake, so that you might become rich through his poverty.
And in this I give my opinion: This is for your benefit, seeing that already a year ago you not only initiated the action but also showed your desire to do it.
So now, also complete what you started to do, so that your readiness to act may be completed according to the means you have available.
For if the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable according to what a person has, not according to what a person does not have.
For I do not want to make it easy for others, but difficult for you;
Now concerning the ministry that is for the holy ones, it is not really necessary for me to write you,
for I know your willingness about which I am boasting to the Mac·e·doʹni·ans, that A·chaʹia has been ready now for a year, and your zeal has stirred up the majority of them.
But I am sending the brothers, so that our boasting about you might not prove empty in this respect and that you may really be ready, just as I said you would be.
Otherwise, if the Mac·e·doʹni·ans should come with me and find you not ready, we—not to mention you—should be put to shame by our confidence in you.
So I thought it necessary to encourage the brothers to come to you ahead of time and to get your promised bountiful gift ready in advance, so that this might be ready as a generous gift, and not as something extorted.
But as to this, whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.
Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.
Moreover, God is able to cause all his undeserved kindness to abound toward you so that you are always completely self-sufficient in everything, as well as having plenty for every good work.
(Just as it is written: “He has distributed widely; he has given to the poor. His righteousness continues forever.”
Now the One who abundantly supplies seed to the sower and bread for eating will supply and multiply the seed for you to sow and will increase the harvest of your righteousness.)
In everything you are being enriched for every sort of generosity, which produces through us an expression of thanks to God;
because the ministry of this public service is not only to provide well for the needs of the holy ones but also to be rich in many expressions of thanks to God.
Through the proof that this relief ministry gives, they glorify God because you are submissive to the good news about the Christ, as you publicly declared, and because you are generous in your contribution to them and to all.
Now I myself, Paul, appeal to you by the mildness and kindness of the Christ, lowly though I am when among you face-to-face, but bold toward you when absent.
I beg that when present, I may not have to be bold and take the strong measures that I expect against some who view us as if we walked in a fleshly manner.
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not wage warfare according to what we are in the flesh.
For the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly, but powerful by God for overturning strongly entrenched things.
For we are overturning reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God, and we are bringing every thought into captivity to make it obedient to the Christ;
and we are prepared to inflict punishment for every disobedience, as soon as your own obedience is complete.
You look at things according to their face value. If anyone is confident in himself that he belongs to Christ, let him reflect again on this fact: Just as he belongs to Christ, so do we also.
For even if I should boast a bit too much about the authority that the Lord gave us to build you up and not to tear you down, I would not be put to shame.
For I do not want to seem as though I were trying to terrify you by my letters.
For they say: “His letters are weighty and forceful, but his presence in person is weak and his speech contemptible.”
Let such a man consider that what we say by letters when absent, this we will also do when present.
For we do not dare to class ourselves or compare ourselves with some who recommend themselves. But when they measure themselves by themselves and compare themselves with themselves, they are without understanding.
However, we will not boast outside our assigned boundaries, but within the boundary of the territory that God measured out to us, making it reach even as far as you.
I wish you would put up with me in a little unreasonableness. But, in fact, you are putting up with me!
For I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, for I personally promised you in marriage to one husband that I might present you as a chaste virgin to the Christ.
But I am afraid that somehow, as the serpent seduced Eve by its cunning, your minds might be corrupted away from the sincerity and the chastity that are due the Christ.
For as it is, if someone comes and preaches a Jesus other than the one we preached, or you receive a spirit other than what you received, or good news other than what you accepted, you easily put up with him.
For I consider that I have not proved inferior to your superfine apostles in a single thing.
But even if I am unskilled in speech, I certainly am not in knowledge; indeed we made it clear to you in every way and in everything.
Or did I commit a sin by humbling myself that you might be exalted, because I gladly declared the good news of God to you without cost?
Other congregations I deprived by accepting provisions in order to minister to you.
Yet, when I was present with you and I fell into need, I did not become a burden on anyone, for the brothers who came from Mac·e·doʹni·a abundantly supplied my needs. Yes, in every way I kept myself from becoming a burden to you and will continue to do so.
As surely as the truth of Christ is in me, I will not stop this boasting in the regions of A·chaʹia.
For what reason? Because I do not love you? God knows I do.
But what I am doing I will continue to do, in order to eliminate the pretext of those who are wanting a basis for being found equal to us in the things about which they boast.
For such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ.
I have to boast. It is not beneficial, but I will move on to supernatural visions and revelations of the Lord.
I know a man in union with Christ who,  years ago—whether in the body or out of the body, I do not know; God knows—was caught away to the third heaven.
Yes, I know such a man—whether in the body or apart from the body, I do not know; God knows—
who was caught away into paradise and heard words that cannot be spoken and that are not lawful for a man to say.
I will boast about such a man, but I will not boast about myself except of my weaknesses.
For even if I want to boast, I will not be unreasonable, for I would say the truth. But I refrain from doing so, in order that no one should give me more credit than what he sees in me or hears from me,
just because of receiving such extraordinary revelations.
Three times I begged the Lord about this, that it would depart from me.
But he said to me: “My undeserved kindness is sufficient for you, for my power is being made perfect in weakness.” Most gladly, then, I will boast about my weaknesses, in order that the power of the Christ may remain over me like a tent.
So I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in times of need, in persecutions and difficulties, for Christ. For when I am weak, then I am powerful.
I have become unreasonable. You compelled me to, for I ought to have been recommended by you. For I did not prove to be inferior to your superfine apostles in a single thing, even if I am nothing.
Indeed, the signs of an apostle were produced among you with great endurance, and by signs and wonders and powerful works.
For how were you less favored than the rest of the congregations, except that I myself did not become a burden to you? Kindly forgive me for this wrong.
This is the third time I am coming to you. “On the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter must be established.”
Although I am absent now, it is as if I were present for the second time, and I give my warning in advance to those who sinned previously and to all the rest, that if ever I come again I will not spare them,
since you are seeking proof that Christ, who is not weak toward you but strong among you, is really speaking through me.
For, indeed, he was executed on the stake because of weakness, but he is alive because of God’s power. True, we also are weak with him, but we will live together with him because of God’s power toward you.
Keep testing whether you are in the faith; keep proving what you yourselves are. Or do you not recognize that Jesus Christ is in union with you? Unless you are disapproved.
I truly hope you will recognize that we are not disapproved.
Now we pray to God that you may do nothing wrong, not that we may appear approved, but that you may do what is fine, even if we may appear disapproved.
For we can do nothing against the truth, but only for the truth.
We certainly rejoice whenever we are weak but you are powerful. And this is what we are praying for, your being readjusted.
That is why I write these things while absent, so that when I am present, I may not have to be severe in using the authority that the Lord gave me, to build up and not to tear down.
Finally, brothers, continue to rejoice, to be readjusted, to be comforted, to think in agreement, to live peaceably; and the God of love and of peace will be with you.
Greet one another with a holy kiss.
All the holy ones send you their greetings.
Paul, an apostle, neither from men nor through a man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him up from the dead,
and all the brothers with me, to the congregations of Ga·laʹti·a:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
He gave himself for our sins so that he might rescue us from the present wicked system of things according to the will of our God and Father,
to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
I am amazed that you are so quickly turning away from the One who called you with Christ’s undeserved kindness to another sort of good news.
Then after  years I again went up to Jerusalem with Barʹna·bas, also taking Titus along with me.
I went up as a result of a revelation, and I presented to them the good news that I am preaching among the nations. This was done privately, however, before the men who were highly regarded, to make sure that I was not running or had not run in vain.
Nevertheless, not even Titus, who was with me, was compelled to be circumcised, although he was a Greek.
But that matter came up because of the false brothers brought in quietly, who slipped in to spy on the freedom we enjoy in union with Christ Jesus, so that they might completely enslave us;
we did not yield in submission to them, no, not for a moment, so that the truth of the good news might continue with you.
But regarding those who seemed to be important—whatever they were makes no difference to me, for God does not go by a man’s outward appearance—those highly regarded men imparted nothing new to me.
O senseless Ga·laʹtians! Who has brought you under this evil influence, you who had Jesus Christ openly portrayed before you as nailed to the stake?
This one thing I want to ask you: Did you receive the spirit through works of law or because of faith in what you heard?
Are you so senseless? After starting on a spiritual course, are you finishing on a fleshly course?
Did you undergo so many sufferings for nothing? If it really was for nothing.
Therefore, does the one who supplies you the spirit and performs powerful works among you do it because of your works of law or because of your faith in what you heard?
Just as Abraham “put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
Now I say that as long as the heir is a young child, he is no different from a slave, although he is the lord of all things,
but he is under supervisors and stewards until the day set ahead of time by his father.
Likewise, we too, when we were children, were enslaved by the elementary things of the world.
But when the full limit of the time arrived, God sent his Son, who was born of a woman and who was under law,
that he might release by purchase those under law, so that we might receive the adoption as sons.
Now because you are sons, God has sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts, and it cries out: “Abba, Father!”
For such freedom Christ set us free. Therefore, stand firm, and do not let yourselves be confined again in a yoke of slavery.
See! I, Paul, am telling you that if you become circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you.
Again I bear witness to every man who gets circumcised that he is under obligation to keep the whole Law.
You are separated from Christ, you who are trying to be declared righteous by means of law; you have fallen away from his undeserved kindness.
For our part, we are by spirit eagerly waiting for the hoped-for righteousness resulting from faith.
For in union with Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is of any value, but faith operating through love is.
Brothers, even if a man takes a false step before he is aware of it, you who have spiritual qualifications try to readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness. But keep an eye on yourself, for fear you too may be tempted.
Go on carrying the burdens of one another, and in this way you will fulfill the law of the Christ.
For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deceiving himself.
But let each one examine his own actions, and then he will have cause for rejoicing in regard to himself alone, and not in comparison with the other person.
For each one will carry his own load.
Moreover, let anyone who is being taught the word share in all good things with the one who gives such teaching.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, to the holy ones who are in Ephʹe·sus and are faithful in union with Christ Jesus:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for he has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in union with Christ,
as he chose us to be in union with him before the founding of the world, that we should be holy and unblemished before him in love.
For he foreordained us to be adopted as his own sons through Jesus Christ, according to his good pleasure and will,
in praise of his glorious undeserved kindness that he kindly bestowed on us by means of his beloved one.
Furthermore, God made you alive, though you were dead in your trespasses and sins,
in which you at one time walked according to the system of things of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience.
Yes, among them we all at one time conducted ourselves in harmony with the desires of our flesh, carrying out the will of the flesh and of our thoughts, and we were naturally children of wrath just as the rest.
But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which he loved us,
made us alive together with the Christ, even when we were dead in trespasses—by undeserved kindness you have been saved.
Moreover, he raised us up together and seated us together in the heavenly places in union with Christ Jesus,
For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus in behalf of you, the people of the nations—
if, really, you have heard about the stewardship of God’s undeserved kindness that was given to me for your sakes,
that by way of a revelation the sacred secret was made known to me, just as I wrote previously in brief.
So when you read this, you can realize my comprehension of the sacred secret of the Christ.
In other generations this secret was not made known to the sons of men as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by spirit,
namely, that people of the nations should, in union with Christ Jesus and through the good news, be joint heirs and fellow members of the body and partakers with us of the promise.
Therefore I, the prisoner in the Lord, appeal to you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called,
with all humility and mildness, with patience, putting up with one another in love,
earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
One body there is, and one spirit, just as you were called to the one hope of your calling;
one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
Therefore, become imitators of God, as beloved children,
and go on walking in love, just as the Christ also loved us and gave himself for us as an offering and a sacrifice, a sweet fragrance to God.
Let sexual immorality and every sort of uncleanness or greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as is proper for holy people;
neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting—things that are not befitting—but rather the giving of thanks.
For you know this, recognizing it for yourselves, that no sexually immoral person or unclean person or greedy person, which means being an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of the Christ and of God.
Let no man deceive you with empty words, for because of such things the wrath of God is coming upon the sons of disobedience.
Children, be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord, for this is righteous.
“Honor your father and your mother” is the first command with a promise:
“That it may go well with you and you may remain a long time on the earth.”
And fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.
Slaves, be obedient to your human masters, with fear and trembling in the sincerity of your hearts, as to the Christ,
not only when being watched, just to please men, but as Christ’s slaves doing the will of God whole-souled.
Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the holy ones in union with Christ Jesus who are in Phi·lipʹpi, along with overseers and ministerial servants:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always when I remember you
in every supplication of mine for all of you. I offer each supplication with joy,
If, then, there is any encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any spiritual fellowship, if any tender affection and compassion,
make my joy full by being of the same mind and having the same love, being completely united, having the one thought in mind.
Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior to you,
as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.
Finally, my brothers, continue rejoicing in the Lord. It is not troublesome for me to write the same things to you, and it is for your safety.
Look out for the dogs; look out for those who cause injury; look out for those who mutilate the flesh.
For we are those with the real circumcision, we who are rendering sacred service by God’s spirit and boasting in Christ Jesus and who do not base our confidence in the flesh,
though I, if anyone, do have grounds for confidence in the flesh.
Consequently, my brothers whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm in this way in the Lord, my beloved ones.
I urge Eu·oʹdi·a and I urge Synʹty·che to be of the same mind in the Lord.
Yes, I request you also, as a true fellow worker, to keep assisting these women who have striven side by side with me for the good news, along with Clement as well as the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
Always rejoice in the Lord. Again I will say, Rejoice!
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy our brother,
to the holy ones and faithful brothers in union with Christ at Co·losʹsae:
We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,
since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and the love you have for all the holy ones
For I want you to realize how great a struggle I am having in your behalf and in behalf of those at La·o·di·ceʹa and in behalf of all those who have not personally seen me.
This is so that their hearts may be comforted and that they may be harmoniously joined together in love and may have all the riches that result from the full assurance of their understanding, in order to gain an accurate knowledge of the sacred secret of God, namely, Christ.
Carefully concealed in him are all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.
I am saying this so that no one may delude you with persuasive arguments.
If, however, you were raised up with the Christ, go on seeking the things above, where the Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
Keep your minds fixed on the things above, not on the things on the earth.
For you died, and your life has been hidden with the Christ in union with God.
When the Christ, our life, is made manifest, then you also will be made manifest with him in glory.
You masters, treat your slaves in a righteous and fair way, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
Persevere in prayer, remaining awake in it with thanksgiving.
At the same time, pray also for us, that God may open a door for the word so that we can declare the sacred secret about the Christ, for which I am in prison bonds,
and that I may proclaim it as clearly as I ought to.
Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
We always thank God when we mention all of you in our prayers,
for we continually remember your faithful work, your loving labor, and your endurance because of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the presence of our God and Father.
For we know, brothers loved by God, his choosing of you,
because the good news we preach did not come to you with speech alone but also with power and with holy spirit and with strong conviction, just as you know what sort of men we became among you for your sakes.
You yourselves surely know, brothers, that our visit to you has not been without results.
For although we had first suffered and been insolently treated in Phi·lipʹpi, as you know, we mustered up boldness by means of our God to tell you the good news of God in the face of much opposition.
For the exhortation we give does not spring from error or from uncleanness or with deceit,
but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the good news, so we speak to please, not men, but God, who examines our hearts.
In fact, you know that we never used flattering speech or put on any false front with greedy motives; God is witness!
So when we could bear it no longer, we thought it best to stay on alone in Athens;
and we sent Timothy, our brother and God’s minister in the good news about the Christ, to make you firm and comfort you regarding your faith,
so that no one might be shaken by these tribulations. For you yourselves know that we cannot avoid suffering such things.
For when we were with you, we used to tell you in advance that we would suffer tribulation, and that is what has happened, just as you know.
That is why, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to learn of your faithfulness, in case somehow the Tempter might have tempted you, and our labor might have turned out to be in vain.
Finally, brothers, just as you received instruction from us on how you should walk in order to please God, just as you are in fact walking, we request you and appeal to you by the Lord Jesus to keep doing it more fully.
For you know the instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, that you should be holy and abstain from sexual immorality.
Each one of you should know how to control his own body in holiness and honor,
not with greedy, uncontrolled sexual passion like the nations have that do not know God.
Now as for the times and the seasons, brothers, you need nothing to be written to you.
For you yourselves know very well that Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.
Whenever it is that they are saying, “Peace and security!” then sudden destruction is to be instantly on them, just like birth pains on a pregnant woman, and they will by no means escape.
But you, brothers, you are not in darkness, so that the day should overtake you as it would thieves,
for you are all sons of light and sons of day. We belong neither to night nor to darkness.
Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We are obligated always to give thanks to God for you, brothers. This is fitting, because your faith is growing exceedingly and the love of each and every one of you is increasing toward one another.
However, brothers, concerning the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to him, we ask you
not to be quickly shaken from your reason nor to be alarmed either by an inspired statement or by a spoken message or by a letter appearing to be from us, to the effect that the day of Jehovah is here.
Let no one lead you astray in any way, because it will not come unless the apostasy comes first and the man of lawlessness gets revealed, the son of destruction.
Finally, brothers, carry on prayer for us, that the word of Jehovah may keep spreading rapidly and being glorified, just as it is with you,
and that we may be rescued from harmful and wicked men, for faith is not a possession of all people.
But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the wicked one.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus, our hope,
to Timothy, a genuine child in the faith:
Just as I encouraged you to stay in Ephʹe·sus when I was about to go to Mac·e·doʹni·a, so I do now, in order for you to command certain ones not to teach different doctrine,
nor to pay attention to false stories and to genealogies. Such things end up in nothing useful but merely give rise to speculations rather than providing anything from God in connection with faith.
Really, the objective of this instruction is love out of a clean heart and out of a good conscience and out of faith without hypocrisy.
By deviating from these things, some have been turned aside to meaningless talk.
First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgiving be made concerning all sorts of men,
concerning kings and all those who are in high positions, so that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with complete godly devotion and seriousness.
This is fine and acceptable in the sight of our Savior, God,
whose will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, a man, Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a corresponding ransom for all—this is what is to be witnessed to in its own due time.
This statement is trustworthy: If a man is reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a fine work.
The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a husband of one wife, moderate in habits, sound in mind, orderly, hospitable, qualified to teach,
not a drunkard, not violent, but reasonable, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money,
a man presiding over his own household in a fine manner, having his children in subjection with all seriousness
(for if any man does not know how to preside over his own household, how will he care for the congregation of God?),
not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil.
However, the inspired word clearly says that in later times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to misleading inspired statements and teachings of demons,
by means of the hypocrisy of men who speak lies, whose conscience is seared as with a branding iron.
They forbid marriage and command people to abstain from foods that God created to be partaken of with thanksgiving by those who have faith and accurately know the truth.
For every creation of God is fine, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving,
for it is sanctified through God’s word and prayer over it.
By giving this counsel to the brothers, you will be a fine minister of Christ Jesus, one nourished with the words of the faith and of the fine teaching that you have followed closely.
Do not severely criticize an older man. On the contrary, appeal to him as a father, to younger men as brothers,
to older women as mothers, to younger women as sisters, with all chasteness.
Give consideration to widows who are truly widows.
But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let these learn first to practice godly devotion in their own household and to repay their parents and grandparents what is due them, for this is acceptable in God’s sight.
Now the woman who is truly a widow and left destitute has put her hope in God and continues in supplications and prayers night and day.
But the one who gives herself to sensual gratification is dead though she is living.
Let those who are under the yoke of slavery keep on considering their owners worthy of full honor, so that the name of God and the teaching may never be spoken of injuriously.
Moreover, let those having believing owners not be disrespectful to them because they are brothers. Rather, they should serve more readily, because those receiving the benefit of their good service are believers and beloved.
If any man teaches another doctrine and does not agree with the wholesome instruction, which is from our Lord Jesus Christ, nor with the teaching that is in harmony with godly devotion,
he is puffed up with pride and does not understand anything. He is obsessed with arguments and debates about words. These things give rise to envy, strife, slander, wicked suspicions,
constant disputes about minor matters by men who are corrupted in mind and deprived of the truth, thinking that godly devotion is a means of gain.
To be sure, there is great gain in godly devotion along with contentment.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by God’s will according to the promise of the life that is through Christ Jesus,
to Timothy, a beloved child:
I am grateful to God, to whom I am rendering sacred service as my forefathers did, and with a clean conscience, never ceasing to remember you in my supplications night and day.
As I remember your tears, I am longing to see you, so that I may get filled with joy.
You, therefore, my child, keep on acquiring power in the undeserved kindness that is in Christ Jesus;
and the things you heard from me that were supported by many witnesses, these things entrust to faithful men, who, in turn, will be adequately qualified to teach others.
As a fine soldier of Christ Jesus, take your part in suffering adversity.
No man serving as a soldier involves himself in the commercial businesses of life, in order to gain the approval of the one who enrolled him as a soldier.
But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.
For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal,
having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness,
betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God,
I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his manifestation and his Kingdom:
Preach the word; be at it urgently in favorable times and difficult times; reprove, reprimand, exhort, with all patience and art of teaching.
For there will be a period of time when they will not put up with the wholesome teaching, but according to their own desires, they will surround themselves with teachers to have their ears tickled.
They will turn away from listening to the truth and give attention to false stories.
Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of God’s chosen ones and the accurate knowledge of the truth that is according to godly devotion
and is based on a hope of the everlasting life that God, who cannot lie, promised long ago;
but in his own due time, he made his word known through the preaching entrusted to me according to the command of our Savior, God;
You, however, keep on speaking what is consistent with wholesome teaching.
Let the older men be moderate in habits, serious, sound in mind, healthy in faith, in love, in endurance.
Likewise, let the older women be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to a lot of wine, teachers of what is good,
Continue reminding them to be in subjection and to be obedient to governments and authorities, to be ready for every good work,
to speak injuriously of no one, not to be quarrelsome, but to be reasonable, displaying all mildness toward all men.
For we too were once senseless, disobedient, led astray, being slaves to various desires and pleasures, carrying on in badness and envy, detestable, hating one another.
Paul, a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Phi·leʹmon our beloved fellow worker,
Long ago God spoke to our forefathers by means of the prophets on many occasions and in many ways.
Now at the end of these days he has spoken to us by means of a Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom he made the systems of things.
He is the reflection of God’s glory and the exact representation of his very being, and he sustains all things by the word of his power. And after he had made a purification for our sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
So he has become better than the angels to the extent that he has inherited a name more excellent than theirs.
For example, to which one of the angels did God ever say: “You are my son; today I have become your father”? And again: “I will become his father, and he will become my son”?
But when he again brings his Firstborn into the inhabited earth, he says: “And let all of God’s angels do obeisance to him.”
Also, he says about the angels: “He makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.”
But about the Son, he says: “God is your throne forever and ever, and the scepter of your Kingdom is the scepter of uprightness.
You loved righteousness, and you hated lawlessness. That is why God, your God, anointed you with the oil of exultation more than your companions.”
And: “At the beginning, O Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works of your hands.
They will perish, but you will remain; and just like a garment, they will all wear out,
and you will wrap them up just as a cloak, as a garment, and they will be changed. But you are the same, and your years will never come to an end.”
But about which of the angels has he ever said: “Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet”?
That is why it is necessary for us to pay more than the usual attention to the things we have heard, so that we never drift away.
For if the word spoken through angels proved to be sure, and every transgression and disobedient act received a punishment in harmony with justice,
how will we escape if we have neglected so great a salvation? For it began to be spoken through our Lord and was verified for us by those who heard him,
while God joined in bearing witness with signs and wonders and various powerful works and with the holy spirit distributed according to his will.
For it is not to angels that he has subjected the inhabited earth to come, about which we are speaking.
But in one place a certain witness said: “What is man that you keep him in mind, or a son of man that you take care of him?
You made him a little lower than angels; you crowned him with glory and honor, and appointed him over the works of your hands.
All things you subjected under his feet.” By subjecting all things to him, God left nothing that is not subject to him. Now, though, we do not yet see all things in subjection to him.
But we do see Jesus, who was made a little lower than angels, now crowned with glory and honor for having suffered death, so that by God’s undeserved kindness he might taste death for everyone.
For it was fitting that the one for whom and through whom all things exist, in bringing many sons to glory, should make the Chief Agent of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
For both the one who is sanctifying and those who are being sanctified all stem from one, and for this reason he is not ashamed to call them brothers,
as he says: “I will declare your name to my brothers; in the midst of the congregation I will praise you with song.”
And again: “I will put my trust in him.” And again: “Look! I and the young children, whom Jehovah gave me.”
Consequently, holy brothers, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the apostle and high priest whom we acknowledge—Jesus.
He was faithful to the One who appointed him, just as Moses also was in all the house of that One.
For he is counted worthy of more glory than Moses, since the one who constructs a house has more honor than the house itself.
Of course, every house is constructed by someone, but the one who constructed all things is God.
Now Moses was faithful as an attendant in all the house of that One as a testimony of the things that were to be spoken afterward,
but Christ was faithful as a son over God’s house. We are His house if, indeed, we hold on firmly to our freeness of speech and the hope of which we boast down to the end.
Therefore, just as the holy spirit says, “Today if you listen to his voice,
do not harden your hearts as on the occasion of provoking to bitter anger, as in the day of testing in the wilderness,
where your forefathers put me to the test and tried me, despite seeing my works for  years.
This is why I became disgusted with this generation and said: ‘They always go astray in their hearts, and they have not come to know my ways.’
So I swore in my anger: ‘They will not enter into my rest.’”
Beware, brothers, for fear there should ever develop in any one of you a wicked heart lacking faith by drawing away from the living God;
but keep on encouraging one another each day, as long as it is called “Today,” so that none of you should become hardened by the deceptive power of sin.
Therefore, since a promise of entering into his rest remains, let us be on guard for fear someone among you seems to fall short of it.
For we have also had the good news declared to us, just as they had; but the word that they heard did not benefit them, because they were not united by faith with those who listened.
For we who have exercised faith do enter into the rest, just as he has said: “So I swore in my anger, ‘They will not enter into my rest,’” although his works were finished from the founding of the world.
For in one place he has said of the seventh day as follows: “And God rested on the seventh day from all his works,”
and here again he says: “They will not enter into my rest.”
Therefore, since it remains for some to enter into it, and those to whom the good news was first declared did not enter in because of disobedience,
he again marks off a certain day by saying long afterward in David’s psalm, “Today”; just as it has been said above, “Today if you listen to his voice, do not harden your hearts.”
For if Joshua had led them into a place of rest, God would not afterward have spoken of another day.
So there remains a sabbath-rest for the people of God.
For the man who has entered into God’s rest has also rested from his own works, just as God did from his own.
Let us therefore do our utmost to enter into that rest, so that no one may fall into the same pattern of disobedience.
For the word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword and pierces even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of joints from the marrow, and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.
And there is not a creation that is hidden from his sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of the one to whom we must give an account.
For every high priest taken from among men is appointed in their behalf over the things relating to God, so that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
He is able to deal compassionately with the ignorant and erring ones, since he too is confronted with his own weakness,
and because of that he must make offerings for his own sins just as he does for those of the people.
A man does not take this honor of his own accord, but he receives it only when he is called by God, just as Aaron was.
So, too, the Christ did not glorify himself by becoming a high priest, but was glorified by the One who said to him: “You are my son; today I have become your father.”
As he also says in another place, “You are a priest forever in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.”
During his life on earth, Christ offered up supplications and also petitions, with strong outcries and tears, to the One who was able to save him out of death, and he was favorably heard for his godly fear.
Although he was a son, he learned obedience from the things he suffered.
And after he had been made perfect, he became responsible for everlasting salvation to all those obeying him,
because he has been designated by God a high priest in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.
We have much to say about him, and it is difficult to explain, because you have become dull in your hearing.
For although by now you should be teachers, you again need someone to teach you from the beginning the elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God, and you have gone back to needing milk, not solid food.
For everyone who continues to feed on milk is unacquainted with the word of righteousness, for he is a young child.
Therefore, now that we have moved beyond the primary doctrine about the Christ, let us press on to maturity, not laying a foundation again, namely, repentance from dead works and faith in God,
the teaching on baptisms and the laying on of the hands, the resurrection of the dead and everlasting judgment.
And this we will do, if God indeed permits.
For as regards those who were once enlightened and who have tasted the heavenly free gift and who have become partakers of holy spirit
and who have tasted the fine word of God and powers of the coming system of things,
but have fallen away, it is impossible to revive them again to repentance, because they nail the Son of God to the stake again for themselves and expose him to public shame.
For the ground receives a blessing from God when it drinks in the rain that frequently falls on it and then produces vegetation useful to those for whom it is cultivated.
But if it produces thorns and thistles, it is rejected and is near to being cursed, and in the end it will be burned.
But in your case, beloved ones, we are convinced of better things, things related to salvation, even though we are speaking in this way.
For God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones.
But we desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end,
so that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
For when God made his promise to Abraham, since he could not swear by anyone greater, he swore by himself,
For this Mel·chizʹe·dek, king of Saʹlem, priest of the Most High God, met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him,
and Abraham gave him a tenth of everything. First, his name is translated “King of Righteousness,” and then also king of Saʹlem, that is, “King of Peace.”
In being fatherless, motherless, without genealogy, having neither a beginning of days nor an end of life, but being made like the Son of God, he remains a priest for all time.
See how great this man was to whom Abraham, the family head, gave a tenth out of the best spoils.
True, according to the Law, those of the sons of Leʹvi who receive their priestly office have a commandment to collect tithes from the people, that is, from their brothers, even though these are descendants of Abraham.
But this man who did not trace his genealogy from them took tithes from Abraham and blessed the one who had the promises.
Now it is undeniable that the lesser one is blessed by the greater.
And in the one case, it is men who are dying who receive tithes, but in the other case, it is someone of whom witness is given that he lives.
And it could be said that even Leʹvi, who receives tithes, has paid tithes through Abraham,
for he was still a future descendant of his forefather when Mel·chizʹe·dek met him.
If, then, perfection was attainable through the Levitical priesthood (for it was a feature of the Law that was given to the people), what further need would there be for another priest to arise who is said to be in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek and not in the manner of Aaron?
For since the priesthood is being changed, it becomes necessary to change the Law as well.
For the man about whom these things are said came from another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar.
Now this is the main point of what we are saying: We have such a high priest as this, and he has sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
a minister of the holy place and of the true tent, which Jehovah set up, and not man.
For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices; so it was necessary for this one also to have something to offer.
If he were on earth, he would not be a priest, since there are already men who offer the gifts according to the Law.
These men are offering sacred service in a typical representation and a shadow of the heavenly things; just as Moses, when about to construct the tent, was given the divine command: For He says: “See that you make all things after their pattern that was shown to you in the mountain.”
But now Jesus has obtained a more excellent ministry because he is also the mediator of a correspondingly better covenant, which has been legally established on better promises.
If that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no need for a second.
For he does find fault with the people when he says: “‘Look! The days are coming,’ says Jehovah, ‘when I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant.
It will not be like the covenant that I made with their forefathers on the day I took hold of their hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they did not remain in my covenant, so I stopped caring for them,’ says Jehovah.
“‘For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,’ says Jehovah. ‘I will put my laws in their mind, and in their hearts I will write them. And I will become their God, and they will become my people.
“‘And they will no longer teach each one his fellow citizen and each one his brother, saying: “Know Jehovah!” For they will all know me, from the least to the greatest of them.
For I will be merciful toward their unrighteous deeds, and I will no longer call their sins to mind.’”
In his saying “a new covenant,” he has made the former one obsolete. Now what is obsolete and growing old is near to vanishing away.
For its part, the former covenant used to have legal requirements for sacred service and its holy place on earth.
For a first tent compartment was constructed, in which were the lampstand and the table and the display of the loaves of presentation; and it is called the Holy Place.
But behind the second curtain was the tent compartment called the Most Holy.
This had a golden censer and the ark of the covenant completely overlaid with gold, in which were the golden jar containing the manna and Aaron’s rod that budded and the tablets of the covenant;
and above it were the glorious cherubs overshadowing the propitiatory cover. But now is not the time to speak of these things in detail.
After these things were constructed this way, the priests enter the first tent compartment regularly to perform the sacred services;
but the high priest enters alone into the second compartment once a year, not without blood, which he offers for himself and for the sins that the people committed in ignorance.
Thus the holy spirit makes it clear that the way into the holy place had not yet been revealed while the first tent was standing.
This tent is an illustration for the present time, and according to this arrangement, both gifts and sacrifices are offered. However, these are not able to make the conscience of the man doing sacred service perfect.
They have to do only with foods and drinks and various ceremonial washings. They were legal requirements concerning the body and were imposed until the appointed time to set things straight.
However, when Christ came as a high priest of the good things that have already taken place, he passed through the greater and more perfect tent not made with hands, that is, not of this creation.
He entered into the holy place, not with the blood of goats and of young bulls, but with his own blood, once for all time, and obtained an everlasting deliverance for us.
For if the blood of goats and of bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who have been defiled sanctifies for the cleansing of the flesh,
For since the Law has a shadow of the good things to come, but not the very substance of the things, it can never, by the same sacrifices that are continually offered year after year, make those who approach perfect.
Otherwise, would not the sacrifices have stopped being offered, because those rendering sacred service once cleansed would have no consciousness of sins anymore?
On the contrary, these sacrifices are a reminder of sins year after year,
for it is not possible for the blood of bulls and of goats to take sins away.
So when he comes into the world, he says: “‘Sacrifice and offering you did not want, but you prepared a body for me.
You did not approve of whole burnt offerings and sin offerings.’
Then I said: ‘Look! I have come (in the scroll it is written about me) to do your will, O God.’”
After first saying: “You did not want nor did you approve of sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and sin offerings”—sacrifices that are offered according to the Law—
then he says: “Look! I have come to do your will.” He does away with what is first in order to establish what is second.
By this “will” we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all time.
Also, every priest takes his station day after day to offer holy service and to make the same sacrifices often, which can never take sins away completely.
But this man offered one sacrifice for sins for all time and sat down at the right hand of God,
from then on waiting until his enemies should be placed as a stool for his feet.
Faith is the assured expectation of what is hoped for, the evident demonstration of realities that are not seen.
For by means of it, the men of ancient times had witness borne to them.
By faith we perceive that the systems of things were put in order by God’s word, so that what is seen has come into existence from things that are not visible.
By faith Abel offered God a sacrifice of greater worth than that of Cain, and through that faith he received the witness that he was righteous, for God approved his gifts, and although he died, he still speaks through his faith.
By faith Eʹnoch was transferred so as not to see death, and he was nowhere to be found because God had transferred him; for before he was transferred he received the witness that he had pleased God well.
Moreover, without faith it is impossible to please God well, for whoever approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.
By faith Noah, after receiving divine warning of things not yet seen, showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household; and through this faith he condemned the world, and he became an heir of the righteousness that results from faith.
By faith Abraham, when he was called, obeyed by going out to a place he was to receive as an inheritance; he went out, although not knowing where he was going.
By faith he lived as a foreigner in the land of the promise as in a foreign land, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the very same promise.
For he was awaiting the city having real foundations, whose designer and builder is God.
By faith also Sarah received power to conceive offspring, even when she was past the age, since she considered Him faithful who made the promise.
For this reason, from one man who was as good as dead, there were born children, as many as the stars of heaven in number and as innumerable as the sands by the seaside.
In faith all of these died, although they did not receive the fulfillment of the promises; but they saw them from a distance and welcomed them and publicly declared that they were strangers and temporary residents in the land.
So, then, because we have such a great cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also throw off every weight and the sin that easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us,
as we look intently at the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our faith, Jesus. For the joy that was set before him he endured a torture stake, despising shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
Indeed, consider closely the one who has endured such hostile speech from sinners against their own interests, so that you may not get tired and give up.
In your struggle against that sin, you have never yet resisted to the point of having your blood shed.
And you have entirely forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as sons: “My son, do not belittle the discipline from Jehovah, nor give up when you are corrected by him;
for those whom Jehovah loves he disciplines, in fact, he scourges everyone whom he receives as a son.”
You need to endure as part of your discipline. God is treating you as sons. For what son is not disciplined by his father?
But if you have not all shared in receiving this discipline, you are really illegitimate children, and not sons.
Furthermore, our human fathers used to discipline us, and we gave them respect. Should we not more readily submit ourselves to the Father of our spiritual life and live?
For they disciplined us for a short time according to what seemed good to them, but he does so for our benefit so that we may partake of his holiness.
True, no discipline seems for the present to be joyous, but it is painful; yet afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.
Therefore, strengthen the hands that hang down and the feeble knees,
and keep making straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but, rather, may be healed.
Let your brotherly love continue.
Do not forget hospitality, for through it some unknowingly entertained angels.
Keep in mind those in prison, as though you were imprisoned with them, and those being mistreated, since you yourselves also are in the body.
Let marriage be honorable among all, and let the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers.
Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. For he has said: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.”
So that we may be of good courage and say: “Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?”
Remember those who are taking the lead among you, who have spoken the word of God to you, and as you contemplate how their conduct turns out, imitate their faith.
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today, and forever.
Do not be led astray by various and strange teachings, for it is better for the heart to be strengthened by undeserved kindness than by foods, which do not benefit those occupied with them.
We have an altar from which those who offer sacred service at the tent have no authority to eat.
For the bodies of those animals whose blood is taken into the holy place as a sin offering by the high priest are burned up outside the camp.
Therefore, Jesus also suffered outside the city gate in order to sanctify the people with his own blood.
Let us, then, go to him outside the camp, bearing the reproach he bore,
James, a slave of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the  tribes that are scattered about:
Consider it all joy, my brothers, when you meet with various trials,
knowing as you do that this tested quality of your faith produces endurance.
But let endurance complete its work, so that you may be complete and sound in all respects, not lacking in anything.
So if any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching, and it will be given him.
My brothers, you are not holding to the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ while showing favoritism, are you?
For if a man with gold rings on his fingers and in splendid clothing comes into your meeting, but a poor man in filthy clothing also enters,
do you look with favor on the one wearing the splendid clothing and say, “You take this seat here in a fine place,” and do you say to the poor one, “You keep standing” or, “Take that seat there under my footstool”?
If so, do you not have class distinctions among yourselves, and have you not become judges rendering wicked decisions?
Listen, my beloved brothers. Did not God choose those who are poor from the world’s standpoint to be rich in faith and heirs of the Kingdom, which he promised to those who love him?
Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers, knowing that we will receive heavier judgment.
For we all stumble many times. If anyone does not stumble in word, he is a perfect man, able to bridle also his whole body.
If we put bridles in the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we guide also their whole body.
Look also at ships: Although they are so big and are driven by strong winds, they are steered by a very small rudder wherever the man at the helm is inclined to go.
So, too, the tongue is a small part of the body, and yet it makes great brags. See how small a fire it takes to set a great forest ablaze!
What is the source of the wars and fights among you? Do they not originate from your fleshly desires that carry on a conflict within you?
You desire, and yet you do not have. You go on murdering and coveting, and yet you are not able to obtain. You go on fighting and waging war. You do not have because of your not asking.
When you do ask, you do not receive because you are asking for a wrong purpose, so that you may spend it on your fleshly desires.
Adulteresses, do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever, therefore, wants to be a friend of the world is making himself an enemy of God.
Or do you think that for no reason the scripture says: “The spirit that has taken up residence within us keeps enviously longing”?
Come, now, you rich men, weep and wail over the miseries that are coming upon you.
Your riches have rotted, and your clothing has become moth-eaten.
Your gold and silver have rusted away, and their rust will be a witness against you and will consume your flesh. What you have stored up will be like a fire in the last days.
Look! The wages you have withheld from the workers who harvested your fields keep crying out, and the cries for help of the reapers have reached the ears of Jehovah of armies.
You have lived in luxury and for self-gratification on the earth. You have fattened your hearts on the day of slaughter.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the temporary residents scattered about in Ponʹtus, Ga·laʹti·a, Cap·pa·doʹci·a, Asia, and Bi·thynʹi·a, to those chosen
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, with sanctification by the spirit, for the purpose of being obedient and sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ:
Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for according to his great mercy he gave us a new birth to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance. It is reserved in the heavens for you,
who are being safeguarded by God’s power through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last period of time.
So rid yourselves of all badness and deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all backbiting.
As newborn infants, form a longing for the unadulterated milk of the word, so that by means of it you may grow to salvation,
provided you have tasted that the Lord is kind.
As you come to him, a living stone rejected by men but chosen, precious to God,
you yourselves as living stones are being built up into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, in order to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
In the same way, you wives, be in subjection to your husbands, so that if any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives,
because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with deep respect.
Do not let your adornment be external—the braiding of hair and the wearing of gold ornaments or fine clothing—
but let it be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible adornment of the quiet and mild spirit, which is of great value in the eyes of God.
For this is how the holy women of the past who hoped in God used to adorn themselves, subjecting themselves to their husbands,
Since Christ suffered in the flesh, you too arm yourselves with the same mental disposition; because the person who has suffered in the flesh has desisted from sins,
so that he may live the remainder of his time in the flesh, no more for the desires of men, but for God’s will.
For the time that has passed by is sufficient for you to have done the will of the nations when you carried on in acts of brazen conduct, unbridled passions, overdrinking, wild parties, drinking bouts, and lawless idolatries.
They are puzzled that you do not continue running with them in the same decadent course of debauchery, so they speak abusively of you.
But these people will render an account to the one who is ready to judge those living and those dead.
Therefore, as a fellow elder, a witness of the sufferings of the Christ and a sharer of the glory that is to be revealed, I make this appeal to the elders among you:
Shepherd the flock of God under your care, serving as overseers, not under compulsion, but willingly before God; not for love of dishonest gain, but eagerly;
not lording it over those who are God’s inheritance, but becoming examples to the flock.
And when the chief shepherd has been made manifest, you will receive the unfading crown of glory.
In the same way, you younger men, be in subjection to the older men. But all of you clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.
Simon Peter, a slave and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have acquired a faith as precious as ours through the righteousness of our God and the Savior Jesus Christ:
May undeserved kindness and peace be increased to you by an accurate knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,
for his divine power has granted us all the things that contribute to life and godly devotion through the accurate knowledge of the One who called us by his own glory and virtue.
However, there also came to be false prophets among the people, as there will also be false teachers among you. These will quietly bring in destructive sects, and they will even disown the owner who bought them, bringing speedy destruction upon themselves.
Furthermore, many will follow their brazen conduct, and because of them the way of the truth will be spoken of abusively.
Also, they will greedily exploit you with counterfeit words. But their judgment, decided long ago, is not moving slowly, and their destruction is not sleeping.
Beloved ones, this is now the second letter I am writing you in which, as in my first one, I am stirring up your clear thinking faculties by way of a reminder,
that you should remember the sayings previously spoken by the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior through your apostles.
First of all know this, that in the last days ridiculers will come with their ridicule, proceeding according to their own desires
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have observed and our hands have felt, concerning the word of life,
(yes, the life was made manifest, and we have seen and are bearing witness and reporting to you the everlasting life that was with the Father and was made manifest to us),
that which we have seen and heard we are reporting also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us. And this fellowship of ours is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.
And we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete.
This is the message that we heard from him and are announcing to you: God is light, and there is no darkness at all in him.
My little children, I am writing you these things so that you may not commit a sin. And yet, if anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father, Jesus Christ, a righteous one.
And he is a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins, yet not for ours only but also for the whole world’s.
And by this we realize that we have come to know him, namely, if we continue observing his commandments.
The one who says, “I have come to know him,” and yet does not observe his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in this person.
Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the holy ones in union with Christ Jesus who are in Phi·lipʹpi, along with overseers and ministerial servants:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always when I remember you
in every supplication of mine for all of you. I offer each supplication with joy,
because of the contribution you have made to the good news from the first day until this moment.
For I am confident of this very thing, that the one who started a good work in you will bring it to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
It is only right for me to think this regarding all of you, since I have you in my heart, you who are sharers with me in the undeserved kindness both in my prison bonds and in the defending and legally establishing of the good news.
For God is my witness of how I am longing for all of you with such tender affection as Christ Jesus has.
And this is what I continue praying, that your love may abound still more and more with accurate knowledge and full discernment;
that you may make sure of the more important things, so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of Christ;
and that you may be filled with righteous fruit, which is through Jesus Christ, to God’s glory and praise.
Now I want you to know, brothers, that my situation has actually turned out for the advancement of the good news,
so that my prison bonds for the sake of Christ have become public knowledge among all the Prae·toʹri·an Guard and all the rest.
Now most of the brothers in the Lord have gained confidence because of my prison bonds, and they are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.
True, some are preaching the Christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill.
The latter are proclaiming the Christ out of love, for they know that I have been appointed to defend the good news;
but the former do it out of contentiousness, not with a pure motive, for they are intending to create trouble for me in my prison bonds.
With what result? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is being proclaimed, and I rejoice over this. In fact, I will also keep on rejoicing,
for I know that this will result in my salvation through your supplication and with the support of the spirit of Jesus Christ.
This is in harmony with my eager expectation and hope that I will not be ashamed in any respect, but that with all freeness of speech Christ will now, as always before, be magnified by means of my body, whether through life or through death.
For in my case, to live is Christ and to die is gain.
Now if I am to live on in the flesh, this is a fruitage of my work; yet what I would choose, I do not make known.
I am torn between these two things, for I do desire the releasing and the being with Christ, which is, to be sure, far better.
However, it is more necessary for me to remain in the flesh for your sakes.
So, being confident of this, I know I will remain and continue with all of you for your advancement and your joy in the faith,
so that your exultation may overflow in Christ Jesus because of me when I am again present with you.
Only behave in a manner worthy of the good news about the Christ, so that whether I come and see you or I am absent, I may hear about you and learn that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one soul, striving side by side for the faith of the good news,
and in no way being frightened by your opponents. This very thing is a proof of destruction for them, but of salvation for you; and this is from God.
For you have been given the privilege in behalf of Christ, not only to put your faith in him but also to suffer in his behalf.
For you are facing the same struggle that you saw me face, which you now hear that I am still facing.If, then, there is any encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any spiritual fellowship, if any tender affection and compassion,
make my joy full by being of the same mind and having the same love, being completely united, having the one thought in mind.
Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior to you,
as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.
Keep this mental attitude in you that was also in Christ Jesus,
who, although he was existing in God’s form, did not even consider the idea of trying to be equal to God.
No, but he emptied himself and took a slave’s form and became human.
More than that, when he came as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to the point of death, yes, death on a torture stake.
For this very reason, God exalted him to a superior position and kindly gave him the name that is above every other name,
so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend—of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground—
and every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.
Consequently, my beloved ones, just as you have always obeyed, not only during my presence but now much more readily during my absence, keep working out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
For God is the one who for the sake of his good pleasure energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.
Keep doing all things free from murmuring and arguments,
so that you may come to be blameless and innocent, children of God without a blemish in the midst of a crooked and twisted generation, among whom you are shining as illuminators in the world,
keeping a tight grip on the word of life. Then I may have reason for rejoicing in Christ’s day, knowing that I did not run in vain or work hard in vain.
However, even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and the holy service to which your faith has led you, I am glad and I rejoice with all of you.
In the same way, you also should be glad and rejoice with me.
Now I am hoping in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you shortly, so that I may be encouraged when I receive news about you.
For I have no one else of a disposition like his who will genuinely care for your concerns.
For all the others are seeking their own interests, not those of Jesus Christ.
But you know the proof he gave of himself, that like a child with a father he slaved with me to advance the good news.
Therefore, he is the one I am hoping to send just as soon as I see how things turn out for me.
Indeed, I am confident in the Lord that I myself will also come soon.
But for now I consider it necessary to send to you E·paph·ro·diʹtus, my brother and fellow worker and fellow soldier, and your envoy and personal servant for my need,
since he is longing to see all of you and is depressed because you heard he had fallen sick.
Indeed, he did fall sick nearly to the point of death; but God had mercy on him, in fact, not only on him but also on me, so that I should not have one grief after another.
Therefore, I am sending him with the greatest urgency, so that when you see him you may again rejoice and I may also be less anxious.
So give him the customary welcome in the Lord with all joy, and keep holding men of that sort dear,
because he nearly died on account of the work of Christ, risking his life in order to make up for your not being here to render personal service to me.Finally, my brothers, continue rejoicing in the Lord. It is not troublesome for me to write the same things to you, and it is for your safety.
Look out for the dogs; look out for those who cause injury; look out for those who mutilate the flesh.
For we are those with the real circumcision, we who are rendering sacred service by God’s spirit and boasting in Christ Jesus and who do not base our confidence in the flesh,
though I, if anyone, do have grounds for confidence in the flesh.
If any other man thinks he has grounds for confidence in the flesh, I have more:
circumcised the eighth day, of the nation of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew born from Hebrews; regarding law, a Pharisee;
regarding zeal, persecuting the congregation; regarding righteousness based on law, one who proved himself blameless.
Yet, the things that were gains to me, I have considered loss on account of the Christ.
What is more, I do indeed also consider all things to be loss on account of the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have taken the loss of all things and I consider them as a lot of refuse, that I may gain Christ
and be found in union with him, not because of my own righteousness from following the Law, but because of the righteousness that is through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God based on faith.
My aim is to know him and the power of his resurrection and to share in his sufferings, submitting myself to a death like his,
to see if at all possible I may attain to the earlier resurrection from the dead.
Not that I have already received it or am already made perfect, but I am pressing on to see if I may also lay hold on that for which Christ Jesus selected me.
Brothers, I do not yet consider myself as having taken hold of it; but one thing is certain: Forgetting the things behind and stretching forward to the things ahead,
I am pressing on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God by means of Christ Jesus.
Therefore, let those of us who are mature be of this mental attitude, and if you are mentally inclined otherwise in any respect, God will reveal the above attitude to you.
At any rate, to the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same course.
Unitedly become imitators of me, brothers, and keep your eye on those who are walking in a way that is in harmony with the example we set for you.
For there are many—I used to mention them often but now I mention them also with weeping—who are walking as enemies of the torture stake of the Christ.
Their end is destruction, and their god is their belly, and their glory is really their shame, and they have their minds on earthly things.
But our citizenship exists in the heavens, and we are eagerly waiting for a savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ,
who will transform our humble body to be like his glorious body by his great power that enables him to subject all things to himself.Consequently, my brothers whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm in this way in the Lord, my beloved ones.
I urge Eu·oʹdi·a and I urge Synʹty·che to be of the same mind in the Lord.
Yes, I request you also, as a true fellow worker, to keep assisting these women who have striven side by side with me for the good news, along with Clement as well as the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
Always rejoice in the Lord. Again I will say, Rejoice!
Let your reasonableness become known to all men. The Lord is near.
Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God;
and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.
Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well-spoken-of, whatever things are virtuous, and whatever things are praiseworthy, continue considering these things.
The things that you learned as well as accepted and heard and saw in connection with me, practice these, and the God of peace will be with you.
I rejoice greatly in the Lord that now at last you have renewed your concern for me. Though you were concerned about me, you lacked opportunity to show it.
Not that I am saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be self-sufficient regardless of my circumstances.
I know how to be low on provisions and how to have an abundance. In everything and in all circumstances I have learned the secret of both how to be full and how to hunger, both how to have an abundance and how to do without.
For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.
Nevertheless, you did well to share with me in my tribulation.
In fact, you Phi·lipʹpi·ans also know that after you first learned the good news, when I departed from Mac·e·doʹni·a, not a congregation shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving, except you alone;
for while I was in Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, you sent something to me for my need not just once but twice.
Not that I am looking for a gift, but I want the fruitage that brings more credit to your account.
However, I have everything I need and even more. I am fully supplied, now that I have received from E·paph·ro·diʹtus what you sent, a sweet fragrance, an acceptable sacrifice, well-pleasing to God.
In turn my God will fully supply all your need according to his riches in glory by means of Christ Jesus.
Now to our God and Father be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Give my greetings to every holy one in union with Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send you their greetings.
All the holy ones, but especially those of the household of Caesar, send you their greetings.
The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the spirit you show.Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy our brother,
to the holy ones and faithful brothers in union with Christ at Co·losʹsae:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father.
We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,
since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and the love you have for all the holy ones
because of the hope that is being reserved for you in the heavens. You previously heard about this hope through the message of truth of the good news
that has come to you. Just as the good news is bearing fruit and increasing in all the world, so it is also doing among you from the day you heard and accurately knew the undeserved kindness of God in truth.
That is what you have learned from our beloved fellow slave Epʹa·phras, who is a faithful minister of the Christ on our behalf.
He also made known to us your love in a spiritual way.
That is also why from the day we heard of it, we have never stopped praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the accurate knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual comprehension,
so as to walk worthily of Jehovah in order to please him fully as you go on bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the accurate knowledge of God;
and may you be strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may endure fully with patience and joy,
as you thank the Father, who made you qualify to share in the inheritance of the holy ones in the light.
He rescued us from the authority of the darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of his beloved Son,
by means of whom we have our release by ransom, the forgiveness of our sins.
He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation;
because by means of him all other things were created in the heavens and on the earth, the things visible and the things invisible, whether they are thrones or lordships or governments or authorities. All other things have been created through him and for him.
Also, he is before all other things, and by means of him all other things were made to exist,
and he is the head of the body, the congregation. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that he might become the one who is first in all things;
because God was pleased to have all fullness to dwell in him,
and through him to reconcile to himself all other things by making peace through the blood he shed on the torture stake, whether the things on the earth or the things in the heavens.
Indeed, you who were once alienated and enemies because your minds were on the works that were wicked,
he has now reconciled by means of that one’s fleshly body through his death, in order to present you holy and unblemished and open to no accusation before him—
provided, of course, that you continue in the faith, established on the foundation and steadfast, not being shifted away from the hope of that good news that you heard and that was preached in all creation under heaven. Of this good news I, Paul, became a minister.
I am now rejoicing in my sufferings for your sake, and I am undergoing the tribulations of the Christ that are yet lacking in my flesh in behalf of his body, which is the congregation.
I became a minister of this congregation in accord with the stewardship from God that was given to me in your behalf to preach the word of God fully,
the sacred secret that was hidden from the past systems of things and from the past generations. But now it has been revealed to his holy ones,
to whom God has been pleased to make known among the nations the glorious riches of this sacred secret, which is Christ in union with you, the hope of his glory.
He is the one we are proclaiming, admonishing everyone and teaching everyone in all wisdom, so that we may present every person complete in union with Christ.
To this end I am indeed working hard, exerting myself with his strength that is operating powerfully within me.For I want you to realize how great a struggle I am having in your behalf and in behalf of those at La·o·di·ceʹa and in behalf of all those who have not personally seen me.
This is so that their hearts may be comforted and that they may be harmoniously joined together in love and may have all the riches that result from the full assurance of their understanding, in order to gain an accurate knowledge of the sacred secret of God, namely, Christ.
Carefully concealed in him are all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.
I am saying this so that no one may delude you with persuasive arguments.
Though I am absent in body, I am with you in spirit, rejoicing to see your good order and the firmness of your faith in Christ.
Therefore, just as you have accepted Christ Jesus the Lord, go on walking in union with him,
being rooted and built up in him and being stabilized in the faith, just as you were taught, and overflowing with thanksgiving.
Look out that no one takes you captive by means of the philosophy and empty deception according to human tradition, according to the elementary things of the world and not according to Christ;
because it is in him that all the fullness of the divine quality dwells bodily.
So you have acquired a fullness by means of him, the one who is the head of all government and authority.
By your relationship with him, you were also circumcised with a circumcision performed without hands by stripping off the fleshly body, by the circumcision that belongs to the Christ.
For you were buried with him in his baptism, and by your relationship with him you were also raised up together through your faith in the powerful work of God, who raised him up from the dead.
Furthermore, though you were dead in your trespasses and in the uncircumcised state of your flesh, God made you alive together with him. He kindly forgave us all our trespasses
and erased the handwritten document that consisted of decrees and was in opposition to us. He has taken it out of the way by nailing it to the torture stake.
He has stripped the governments and the authorities bare and has publicly exhibited them as conquered, leading them in a triumphal procession by means of it.
Therefore, do not let anyone judge you about what you eat and drink or about the observance of a festival or of the new moon or of a sabbath.
Those things are a shadow of the things to come, but the reality belongs to the Christ.
Let no man deprive you of the prize who takes delight in a false humility and a form of worship of the angels, “taking his stand on” the things he has seen. He is actually puffed up without proper cause by his fleshly frame of mind,
and he is not holding fast to the head, to the one through whom the whole body is supplied and harmoniously joined together by means of its joints and ligaments and made to grow with the growth that is from God.
If you died together with Christ with respect to the elementary things of the world, why do you live as if still part of the world by further subjecting yourselves to the decrees:
“Do not handle, nor taste, nor touch,”
referring to things that all perish with their use, according to the commands and teachings of men?
Although those things have an appearance of wisdom in a self-imposed form of worship and a false humility, a harsh treatment of the body, they are of no value in combating the satisfying of the flesh.If, however, you were raised up with the Christ, go on seeking the things above, where the Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
Keep your minds fixed on the things above, not on the things on the earth.
For you died, and your life has been hidden with the Christ in union with God.
When the Christ, our life, is made manifest, then you also will be made manifest with him in glory.
Deaden, therefore, your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion, hurtful desire, and greediness, which is idolatry.
On account of those things the wrath of God is coming.
That is how you too used to conduct yourselves in your former way of life.
But now you must put them all away from you: wrath, anger, badness, abusive speech, and obscene talk out of your mouth.
Do not lie to one another. Strip off the old personality with its practices,
and clothe yourselves with the new personality, which through accurate knowledge is being made new according to the image of the One who created it,
where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, foreigner, Scythʹi·an, slave, or freeman; but Christ is all things and in all.
Accordingly, as God’s chosen ones, holy and loved, clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, humility, mildness, and patience.
Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.
But besides all these things, clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.
Also, let the peace of the Christ rule in your hearts, for you were called to that peace in one body. And show yourselves thankful.
Let the word of the Christ reside in you richly in all wisdom. Keep on teaching and encouraging one another with psalms, praises to God, spiritual songs sung with gratitude, singing in your hearts to Jehovah.
Whatever it is that you do in word or in deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, thanking God the Father through him.
You wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as it is becoming in the Lord.
You husbands, keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry with them.
You children, be obedient to your parents in everything, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord.
You fathers, do not be exasperating your children, so that they do not become downhearted.
You slaves, be obedient in everything to those who are your human masters, not only when they are watching, just to please men, but with sincerity of heart, with fear of Jehovah.
Whatever you are doing, work at it whole-souled as for Jehovah, and not for men,
for you know that it is from Jehovah you will receive the inheritance as a reward. Slave for the Master, Christ.
Certainly the one who does wrong will be repaid for the wrong he has done, and there is no partiality.You masters, treat your slaves in a righteous and fair way, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
Persevere in prayer, remaining awake in it with thanksgiving.
At the same time, pray also for us, that God may open a door for the word so that we can declare the sacred secret about the Christ, for which I am in prison bonds,
and that I may proclaim it as clearly as I ought to.
Go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside, making the best use of your time.
Let your words always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you will know how you should answer each person.
Tychʹi·cus, my beloved brother and faithful minister and fellow slave in the Lord, will tell you all the news about me.
I am sending him to you so that you will know how we are and that he may comfort your hearts.
He is coming along with O·nesʹi·mus, my faithful and beloved brother, who is from among you; they will tell you all the things happening here.
Ar·is·tarʹchus, my fellow captive, sends you his greetings, and so does Mark, the cousin of Barʹna·bas (concerning whom you received instructions to welcome him if he comes to you),
and Jesus who is called Justus, who are of those circumcised. Only these are my fellow workers for the Kingdom of God, and they have become a source of great comfort to me.
Epʹa·phras, a slave of Christ Jesus who is from among you, sends you his greetings. He is always exerting himself in your behalf in his prayers, so that you may finally stand complete and with firm conviction in all the will of God.
For I bear him witness that he makes great efforts in your behalf and in behalf of those in La·o·di·ceʹa and Hi·e·rapʹo·lis.
Luke, the beloved physician, sends you his greetings, and so does Deʹmas.
Give my greetings to the brothers in La·o·di·ceʹa and to Nymʹpha and to the congregation at her house.
And when this letter has been read among you, arrange for it also to be read in the congregation of the La·o·di·ceʹans and for you also to read the one from La·o·di·ceʹa.
Also, tell Ar·chipʹpus: “Pay attention to the ministry that you accepted in the Lord, in order to fulfill it.”
Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand. Keep my prison bonds in mind. The undeserved kindness be with you.Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace.
We always thank God when we mention all of you in our prayers,
for we continually remember your faithful work, your loving labor, and your endurance because of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the presence of our God and Father.
For we know, brothers loved by God, his choosing of you,
because the good news we preach did not come to you with speech alone but also with power and with holy spirit and with strong conviction, just as you know what sort of men we became among you for your sakes.
And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, seeing that you accepted the word under much tribulation with joy of holy spirit,
so that you became an example to all the believers in Mac·e·doʹni·a and in A·chaʹia.
The fact is, not only has the word of Jehovah sounded out from you in Mac·e·doʹni·a and A·chaʹia but your faith in God has spread abroad in every place, so that we do not need to say anything.
For they themselves keep reporting about our first contact with you and how you turned to God from your idols to slave for a living and true God,
and to wait for his Son from the heavens, whom he raised up from the dead, namely, Jesus, who rescues us from the wrath that is coming.You yourselves surely know, brothers, that our visit to you has not been without results.
For although we had first suffered and been insolently treated in Phi·lipʹpi, as you know, we mustered up boldness by means of our God to tell you the good news of God in the face of much opposition.
For the exhortation we give does not spring from error or from uncleanness or with deceit,
but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the good news, so we speak to please, not men, but God, who examines our hearts.
In fact, you know that we never used flattering speech or put on any false front with greedy motives; God is witness!
Nor have we been seeking glory from men, either from you or from others, though we could be an expensive burden as apostles of Christ.
On the contrary, we became gentle in your midst, as when a nursing mother tenderly cares for her own children.
So having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you, not only the good news of God but also our very selves, because you became so beloved to us.
Surely you remember, brothers, our labor and toil. We were working night and day, so that we would not put an expensive burden on any one of you, when we preached the good news of God to you.
You are witnesses, God is also, of how loyal and righteous and blameless we behaved toward you believers.
You well know that we kept exhorting and consoling you and bearing witness to each one of you, just as a father does his children,
so that you would go on walking worthily of God, who is calling you to his Kingdom and glory.
Indeed, that is why we also thank God unceasingly, because when you received God’s word, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God, which is also at work in you believers.
For you, brothers, became imitators of the congregations of God in union with Christ Jesus that are in Ju·deʹa, because you suffered at the hands of your own countrymen the same things that they also are suffering at the hands of the Jews,
who even killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets and persecuted us. Furthermore, they are not pleasing God, but are against the interests of all men,
as they try to prevent us from speaking to people of the nations so that these might be saved. In this way they always fill up the measure of their sins. But his wrath has at last come upon them.
But when we were separated from you, brothers, for just a short time (in person, not in our hearts), because of our strong desire, we made every effort to see you in person.
For this reason we wanted to come to you, yes I, Paul, tried not just once but twice; yet Satan cut across our path.
For what is our hope or joy or crown of exultation before our Lord Jesus at his presence? Is it not in fact you?
You certainly are our glory and joy.So when we could bear it no longer, we thought it best to stay on alone in Athens;
and we sent Timothy, our brother and God’s minister in the good news about the Christ, to make you firm and comfort you regarding your faith,
so that no one might be shaken by these tribulations. For you yourselves know that we cannot avoid suffering such things.
For when we were with you, we used to tell you in advance that we would suffer tribulation, and that is what has happened, just as you know.
That is why, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to learn of your faithfulness, in case somehow the Tempter might have tempted you, and our labor might have turned out to be in vain.
But Timothy has just now come to us from you and has given us the good news about your faithfulness and love, that you always continue to remember us fondly and that you long to see us in the same way as we also do you.
That is why, brothers, in all our distress and tribulation, we have been comforted because of you and the faithfulness you demonstrate.
Because we are revitalized if you are standing firm in the Lord.
For how can we show our thanks to God concerning you in return for the great joy we feel before our God on your account?
Night and day we make supplications as earnestly as we can to see you in person and to supply what is lacking in your faith.
Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus make a way for us to come to you.
Moreover, may the Lord cause you to increase, yes, to abound in love for one another and for all, just as we do for you,
so that he may make your hearts firm, blameless in holiness before our God and Father at the presence of our Lord Jesus with all his holy ones.Finally, brothers, just as you received instruction from us on how you should walk in order to please God, just as you are in fact walking, we request you and appeal to you by the Lord Jesus to keep doing it more fully.
For you know the instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, that you should be holy and abstain from sexual immorality.
Each one of you should know how to control his own body in holiness and honor,
not with greedy, uncontrolled sexual passion like the nations have that do not know God.
No one should go beyond proper limits and take advantage of his brother in this matter, because Jehovah exacts punishment for all these things, just as we told you previously and also strongly warned you.
For God has called us, not for uncleanness, but for holiness.
So, then, the man who disregards this is disregarding, not man, but God, who gives you his holy spirit.
However, concerning brotherly love, you do not need us to write to you, for you yourselves are taught by God to love one another.
In fact, you are doing so toward all the brothers in all of Mac·e·doʹni·a. But we urge you, brothers, to go on doing so in fuller measure.
Make it your aim to live quietly and to mind your own business and to work with your hands, just as we instructed you,
so that you may walk decently in the eyes of people outside and not need anything.
Moreover, brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who are sleeping in death, so that you may not sorrow as the rest do who have no hope.
For if we have faith that Jesus died and rose again, so too God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in death through Jesus.
For this is what we tell you by Jehovah’s word, that we the living who survive to the presence of the Lord will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep in death;
because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding call, with an archangel’s voice and with God’s trumpet, and those who are dead in union with Christ will rise first.
Afterward we the living who are surviving will, together with them, be caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we will always be with the Lord.
So keep comforting one another with these words.Now as for the times and the seasons, brothers, you need nothing to be written to you.
For you yourselves know very well that Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.
Whenever it is that they are saying, “Peace and security!” then sudden destruction is to be instantly on them, just like birth pains on a pregnant woman, and they will by no means escape.
But you, brothers, you are not in darkness, so that the day should overtake you as it would thieves,
for you are all sons of light and sons of day. We belong neither to night nor to darkness.
So, then, let us not sleep on as the rest do, but let us stay awake and keep our senses.
For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk are drunk at night.
But as for us who belong to the day, let us keep our senses and put on the breastplate of faith and love and the hope of salvation as a helmet
because God assigned us, not to wrath, but to the acquiring of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
He died for us, so that whether we stay awake or are asleep, we should live together with him.
Therefore, keep encouraging one another and building one another up, just as you are in fact doing.
Now we request you, brothers, to show respect for those who are working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord and admonishing you;
and to give them extraordinary consideration in love because of their work. Be peaceable with one another.
On the other hand, we urge you, brothers, to warn the disorderly, speak consolingly to those who are depressed, support the weak, be patient toward all.
See that no one repays injury for injury to anyone, but always pursue what is good toward one another and to all others.
Always be rejoicing.
Pray constantly.
Give thanks for everything. This is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.
Do not put out the fire of the spirit.
Do not treat prophecies with contempt.
Make sure of all things; hold fast to what is fine.
Abstain from every form of wickedness.
May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely. And may the spirit and soul and body of you brothers, sound in every respect, be preserved blameless at the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The one who is calling you is faithful, and he will surely do so.
Brothers, keep praying for us.
Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
I am putting you under the solemn obligation by the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers.
The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We are obligated always to give thanks to God for you, brothers. This is fitting, because your faith is growing exceedingly and the love of each and every one of you is increasing toward one another.
As a result we ourselves take pride in you among the congregations of God because of your endurance and faith in all your persecutions and the hardships that you are suffering.
This is a proof of the righteous judgment of God, leading to your being counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which you are indeed suffering.
This takes into account that it is righteous on God’s part to repay tribulation to those who make tribulation for you.
But you who suffer tribulation will be given relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels
in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance on those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.
These very ones will undergo the judicial punishment of everlasting destruction from before the Lord and from the glory of his strength,
at the time when he comes to be glorified in connection with his holy ones and to be regarded in that day with wonder among all those who exercised faith, because the witness we gave met with faith among you.
To that very end we always pray for you, that our God may count you worthy of his calling and with his power perform completely all the good that he pleases and every work of faith.
This is so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you and you in union with him, according to the undeserved kindness of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.However, brothers, concerning the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to him, we ask you
not to be quickly shaken from your reason nor to be alarmed either by an inspired statement or by a spoken message or by a letter appearing to be from us, to the effect that the day of Jehovah is here.
Let no one lead you astray in any way, because it will not come unless the apostasy comes first and the man of lawlessness gets revealed, the son of destruction.
He stands in opposition and exalts himself above every so-called god or object of worship, so that he sits down in the temple of God, publicly showing himself to be a god.
Do you not remember that when I was still with you, I used to tell you these things?
And now you know what is acting as a restraint, so that he will be revealed in his own due time.
True, the mystery of this lawlessness is already at work, but only until the one who is right now acting as a restraint is out of the way.
Then, indeed, the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will do away with by the spirit of his mouth and bring to nothing by the manifestation of his presence.
But the lawless one’s presence is by the operation of Satan with every powerful work and lying signs and wonders
and every unrighteous deception for those who are perishing, as a retribution because they did not accept the love of the truth in order that they might be saved.
That is why God lets a deceptive influence mislead them so that they may come to believe the lie,
in order that they all may be judged because they did not believe the truth but took pleasure in unrighteousness.
However, we are obligated always to thank God for you, brothers loved by Jehovah, because from the beginning God selected you for salvation by sanctifying you with his spirit and by your faith in the truth.
He called you to this through the good news we declare, so that you may acquire the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So, then, brothers, stand firm and maintain your hold on the traditions that you were taught, whether it was by a spoken message or by a letter from us.
Moreover, may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and gave everlasting comfort and good hope by means of undeserved kindness,
comfort your hearts and make you firm in every good deed and word.Finally, brothers, carry on prayer for us, that the word of Jehovah may keep spreading rapidly and being glorified, just as it is with you,
and that we may be rescued from harmful and wicked men, for faith is not a possession of all people.
But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the wicked one.
Moreover, we have confidence in the Lord regarding you, that you are carrying out and will go on carrying out our instructions.
May the Lord continue to guide your hearts successfully to the love of God and to the endurance for the Christ.
Now we are giving you instructions, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw from every brother who is walking disorderly and not according to the tradition that you received from us.
For you yourselves know how you should imitate us, because we did not behave in a disorderly way among you,
nor did we eat anyone’s food free. On the contrary, by labor and toil we were working night and day so as not to impose an expensive burden on any one of you.
Not that we do not have authority, but we wanted to offer ourselves as an example for you to imitate.
In fact, when we were with you, we used to give you this order: “If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.”
For we hear that some are walking disorderly among you, not working at all, but meddling with what does not concern them.
To such people we give the order and exhortation in the Lord Jesus Christ that they should work quietly and eat food they themselves earn.
For your part, brothers, do not give up in doing good.
But if anyone is not obedient to our word through this letter, keep this one marked and stop associating with him, so that he may become ashamed.
And yet do not consider him an enemy, but continue admonishing him as a brother.
Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace constantly in every way. May the Lord be with all of you.
Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand, which is a sign in every letter; this is the way I write.
The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you.Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus, our hope,
to Timothy, a genuine child in the faith:
May you have undeserved kindness and mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
Just as I encouraged you to stay in Ephʹe·sus when I was about to go to Mac·e·doʹni·a, so I do now, in order for you to command certain ones not to teach different doctrine,
nor to pay attention to false stories and to genealogies. Such things end up in nothing useful but merely give rise to speculations rather than providing anything from God in connection with faith.
Really, the objective of this instruction is love out of a clean heart and out of a good conscience and out of faith without hypocrisy.
By deviating from these things, some have been turned aside to meaningless talk.
They want to be teachers of law, but they do not understand either the things they are saying or the things they insist on so strongly.
Now we know that the Law is fine if one applies it properly,
recognizing that law is made, not for a righteous man, but for those who are lawless and rebellious, ungodly and sinners, disloyal and profane, murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, manslayers,
sexually immoral people, men who practice homosexuality, kidnappers, liars, perjurers, and everything else that is in opposition to the wholesome teaching
according to the glorious good news of the happy God, with which I was entrusted.
I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord, who imparted power to me, because he considered me faithful by assigning me to a ministry,
although formerly I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man. Nevertheless, I was shown mercy because I acted in ignorance and with a lack of faith.
But the undeserved kindness of our Lord abounded exceedingly along with faith and the love that is in Christ Jesus.
This saying is trustworthy and deserving of full acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Of these, I am foremost.
Nevertheless, I was shown mercy so that by means of me as the foremost case, Christ Jesus might demonstrate all his patience, making me an example to those who are going to rest their faith on him for everlasting life.
Now to the King of eternity, incorruptible, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
This instruction I entrust to you, my child Timothy, in harmony with the prophecies that were made about you, that by these you may go on waging the fine warfare,
holding faith and a good conscience, which some have thrust aside, resulting in the shipwreck of their faith.
Hy·me·naeʹus and Alexander are among these, and I have handed them over to Satan so that they may be taught by discipline not to blaspheme.First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgiving be made concerning all sorts of men,
concerning kings and all those who are in high positions, so that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with complete godly devotion and seriousness.
This is fine and acceptable in the sight of our Savior, God,
whose will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, a man, Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a corresponding ransom for all—this is what is to be witnessed to in its own due time.
For the purpose of this witness I was appointed a preacher and an apostle—I am telling the truth, I am not lying—a teacher of nations in the matter of faith and truth.
So I desire that in every place the men carry on prayer, lifting up loyal hands, without anger and debates.
Likewise, the women should adorn themselves in appropriate dress, with modesty and soundness of mind, not with styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive clothing,
but in the way that is proper for women professing devotion to God, namely, through good works.
Let a woman learn in silence with full submissiveness.
I do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man, but she is to remain silent.
For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
Also, Adam was not deceived, but the woman was thoroughly deceived and became a transgressor.
However, she will be kept safe through childbearing, provided she continues in faith and love and holiness along with soundness of mind.This statement is trustworthy: If a man is reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a fine work.
The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a husband of one wife, moderate in habits, sound in mind, orderly, hospitable, qualified to teach,
not a drunkard, not violent, but reasonable, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money,
a man presiding over his own household in a fine manner, having his children in subjection with all seriousness
(for if any man does not know how to preside over his own household, how will he care for the congregation of God?),
not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil.
Moreover, he should also have a fine testimony from outsiders so that he does not fall into reproach and a snare of the Devil.
Ministerial servants should likewise be serious, not double-tongued, not indulging in a lot of wine, not greedy of dishonest gain,
holding the sacred secret of the faith with a clean conscience.
Also, let these be tested as to fitness first; then let them serve as ministers, as they are free from accusation.
Women should likewise be serious, not slanderous, moderate in habits, faithful in all things.
Let ministerial servants be husbands of one wife, presiding in a fine manner over their children and their own households.
For the men who minister in a fine manner are acquiring for themselves a fine standing and great freeness of speech in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
I am writing you these things, though I am hoping to come to you shortly,
but in case I am delayed, so that you may know how you ought to conduct yourself in God’s household, which is the congregation of the living God, a pillar and support of the truth.
Indeed, the sacred secret of this godly devotion is admittedly great: ‘He was made manifest in flesh, was declared righteous in spirit, appeared to angels, was preached about among nations, was believed upon in the world, was received up in glory.’However, the inspired word clearly says that in later times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to misleading inspired statements and teachings of demons,
by means of the hypocrisy of men who speak lies, whose conscience is seared as with a branding iron.
They forbid marriage and command people to abstain from foods that God created to be partaken of with thanksgiving by those who have faith and accurately know the truth.
For every creation of God is fine, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving,
for it is sanctified through God’s word and prayer over it.
By giving this counsel to the brothers, you will be a fine minister of Christ Jesus, one nourished with the words of the faith and of the fine teaching that you have followed closely.
But reject irreverent false stories, like those told by old women. On the other hand, train yourself with godly devotion as your aim.
For physical training is beneficial for a little, but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come.
That statement is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance.
This is why we are working hard and exerting ourselves, because we have rested our hope on a living God, who is a Savior of all sorts of men, especially of faithful ones.
Keep on giving these commands and teaching them.
Never let anyone look down on your youth. Instead, become an example to the faithful ones in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.
Until I come, continue applying yourself to public reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
Do not neglect the gift in you that was given you through a prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you.
Ponder over these things; be absorbed in them, so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people.
Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.Do not severely criticize an older man. On the contrary, appeal to him as a father, to younger men as brothers,
to older women as mothers, to younger women as sisters, with all chasteness.
Give consideration to widows who are truly widows.
But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let these learn first to practice godly devotion in their own household and to repay their parents and grandparents what is due them, for this is acceptable in God’s sight.
Now the woman who is truly a widow and left destitute has put her hope in God and continues in supplications and prayers night and day.
But the one who gives herself to sensual gratification is dead though she is living.
So keep on giving these instructions, so that they may be irreprehensible.
Certainly if anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith.
A widow is to be put on the list if she is not less than  years old, was the wife of one husband,
having a reputation for fine works, if she raised children, if she practiced hospitality, if she washed the feet of holy ones, if she assisted the afflicted, if she devoted herself to every good work.
On the other hand, do not put younger widows on the list, for when their sexual desires come between them and the Christ, they want to marry.
And they will incur judgment because they have abandoned their first expression of faith.
At the same time they also learn to be unoccupied, going around from one house to another; yes, not only unoccupied but also gossipers and meddlers in other people’s affairs, talking about things they should not.
Therefore, I desire the younger widows to marry, to bear children, to manage a household, to give no opportunity to the opposer to criticize.
In fact, some have already been turned aside to follow Satan.
If any believing woman has relatives who are widows, let her assist them so that the congregation is not burdened. Then it can assist those who are truly widows.
Let the elders who preside in a fine way be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard in speaking and teaching.
For the scripture says, “You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out the grain,” also, “The worker is worthy of his wages.”
Do not accept an accusation against an older man except on the evidence of two or three witnesses.
Reprove before all onlookers those who practice sin, as a warning to the rest.
I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus and the chosen angels to observe these instructions without any prejudice or partiality.
Never lay your hands hastily on any man; neither become a sharer in the sins of others; keep yourself chaste.
Do not drink water any longer, but take a little wine for the sake of your stomach and your frequent cases of sickness.
The sins of some men are publicly known, leading directly to judgment, but those of other men become evident later.
In the same way also, the fine works are publicly known and those that are otherwise cannot be kept hidden.Let those who are under the yoke of slavery keep on considering their owners worthy of full honor, so that the name of God and the teaching may never be spoken of injuriously.
Moreover, let those having believing owners not be disrespectful to them because they are brothers. Rather, they should serve more readily, because those receiving the benefit of their good service are believers and beloved.
Keep on teaching these things and giving these exhortations.
If any man teaches another doctrine and does not agree with the wholesome instruction, which is from our Lord Jesus Christ, nor with the teaching that is in harmony with godly devotion,
he is puffed up with pride and does not understand anything. He is obsessed with arguments and debates about words. These things give rise to envy, strife, slander, wicked suspicions,
constant disputes about minor matters by men who are corrupted in mind and deprived of the truth, thinking that godly devotion is a means of gain.
To be sure, there is great gain in godly devotion along with contentment.
For we have brought nothing into the world, and neither can we carry anything out.
So, having food and clothing, we will be content with these things.
But those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and harmful desires that plunge men into destruction and ruin.
For the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things, and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains.
However, you, O man of God, flee from these things. But pursue righteousness, godly devotion, faith, love, endurance, and mildness.
Fight the fine fight of the faith; get a firm hold on the everlasting life for which you were called and you offered the fine public declaration in front of many witnesses.
Before God, who preserves all things alive, and Christ Jesus, who as a witness made the fine public declaration before Pontius Pilate, I give you orders
to observe the commandment in a spotless and irreprehensible way until the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which the happy and only Potentate will show in its own appointed times. He is the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords,
the one alone having immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen or can see. To him be honor and eternal might. Amen.
Instruct those who are rich in the present system of things not to be arrogant, and to place their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God, who richly provides us with all the things we enjoy.
Tell them to work at good, to be rich in fine works, to be generous, ready to share,
safely treasuring up for themselves a fine foundation for the future, so that they may get a firm hold on the real life.
Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you, turning away from the empty speeches that violate what is holy and from the contradictions of the falsely called “knowledge.”
By making a show of such knowledge, some have deviated from the faith.
May the undeserved kindness be with you.Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by God’s will according to the promise of the life that is through Christ Jesus,
to Timothy, a beloved child:
May you have undeserved kindness, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I am grateful to God, to whom I am rendering sacred service as my forefathers did, and with a clean conscience, never ceasing to remember you in my supplications night and day.
As I remember your tears, I am longing to see you, so that I may get filled with joy.
For I recall your unhypocritical faith, which dwelled first in your grandmother Loʹis and your mother Euʹnice, but which I am confident is also in you.
For this reason I remind you to stir up like a fire the gift of God that is in you through the laying of my hands on you.
For God did not give us a spirit of cowardice, but one of power and of love and of soundness of mind.
So do not become ashamed either of the witness about our Lord or of me, a prisoner for his sake, but take your part in suffering adversity for the good news by relying on the power of God.
He saved us and called us with a holy calling, not because of our works, but because of his own purpose and undeserved kindness. This was given to us in connection with Christ Jesus before times long ago,
but now it has been made clearly evident through the manifestation of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who has abolished death and has shed light on life and incorruption through the good news,
for which I was appointed a preacher and an apostle and a teacher.
This is why I am also suffering these things, but I am not ashamed. For I know the One whom I have believed, and I am confident that he is able to guard what I have laid up in trust with him until that day.
Keep holding to the standard of wholesome words that you heard from me with the faith and love that result from union with Christ Jesus.
Guard this fine trust by means of the holy spirit, which is dwelling in us.
You know this, that all the men in the province of Asia have turned away from me, including Phy·gelʹus and Her·mogʹe·nes.
May the Lord grant mercy to the household of On·e·siphʹo·rus, for he often refreshed me, and he did not become ashamed of my prison chains.
On the contrary, when he was in Rome, he diligently looked for me and found me.
May the Lord grant him to find mercy from Jehovah in that day. And you well know all the services he rendered in Ephʹe·sus.You, therefore, my child, keep on acquiring power in the undeserved kindness that is in Christ Jesus;
and the things you heard from me that were supported by many witnesses, these things entrust to faithful men, who, in turn, will be adequately qualified to teach others.
As a fine soldier of Christ Jesus, take your part in suffering adversity.
No man serving as a soldier involves himself in the commercial businesses of life, in order to gain the approval of the one who enrolled him as a soldier.
And even in the games, anyone who competes is not crowned unless he has competed according to the rules.
The hardworking farmer must be the first to partake of the fruits.
Give constant thought to what I am saying; the Lord will give you understanding in all things.
Remember that Jesus Christ was raised up from the dead and was David’s offspring, according to the good news I preach,
for which I am suffering and being imprisoned as a criminal. Nevertheless, the word of God is not bound.
For this reason I go on enduring all things for the sake of the chosen ones, so that they too may obtain the salvation that is through Christ Jesus, along with everlasting glory.
This saying is trustworthy: Certainly if we died together, we will also live together;
if we go on enduring, we will also rule together as kings; if we deny, he will also deny us;
if we are unfaithful, he remains faithful, for he cannot deny himself.
Keep reminding them of these things, instructing them before God not to fight about words, something of no usefulness at all because it harms those listening.
Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.
But reject empty speeches that violate what is holy, for they will lead to more and more ungodliness,
and their word will spread like gangrene. Hy·me·naeʹus and Phi·leʹtus are among them.
These men have deviated from the truth, saying that the resurrection has already occurred, and they are subverting the faith of some.
Despite that, the solid foundation of God remains standing, having this seal, “Jehovah knows those who belong to him,” and, “Let everyone calling on the name of Jehovah renounce unrighteousness.”
Now in a large house there are utensils not only of gold and silver but also of wood and earthenware, and some for an honorable use but others for a use lacking honor.
So if anyone keeps clear of the latter ones, he will be an instrument for an honorable use, sanctified, useful to his owner, prepared for every good work.
So flee from youthful desires, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, along with those who call on the Lord out of a clean heart.
Further, reject foolish and ignorant debates, knowing that they produce fights.
For a slave of the Lord does not need to fight, but needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach, showing restraint when wronged,
instructing with mildness those not favorably disposed. Perhaps God may give them repentance leading to an accurate knowledge of truth,
and they may come to their senses and escape from the snare of the Devil, seeing that they have been caught alive by him to do his will.But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.
For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal,
having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness,
betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God,
having an appearance of godliness but proving false to its power; and from these turn away.
From among these arise men who slyly work their way into households and captivate weak women loaded down with sins, led by various desires,
always learning and yet never able to come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
Now in the way that Janʹnes and Jamʹbres opposed Moses, so these also go on opposing the truth. Such men are completely corrupted in mind, disapproved as regards the faith.
Nevertheless, they will make no further progress, for their folly will be very plain to all, as it was with those two men.
But you have closely followed my teaching, my course of life, my purpose, my faith, my patience, my love, my endurance,
the persecutions and sufferings such as I experienced in Antioch, in I·coʹni·um, in Lysʹtra. I endured these persecutions, and the Lord rescued me from them all.
In fact, all those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.
But wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, misleading and being misled.
You, however, continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe, knowing from whom you learned them
and that from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness,
so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his manifestation and his Kingdom:
Preach the word; be at it urgently in favorable times and difficult times; reprove, reprimand, exhort, with all patience and art of teaching.
For there will be a period of time when they will not put up with the wholesome teaching, but according to their own desires, they will surround themselves with teachers to have their ears tickled.
They will turn away from listening to the truth and give attention to false stories.
You, though, keep your senses in all things, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.
For I am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time for my releasing is imminent.
I have fought the fine fight, I have run the race to the finish, I have observed the faith.
From this time on, there is reserved for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me as a reward in that day, yet not to me only, but also to all those who have loved his manifestation.
Do your utmost to come to me shortly.
For Deʹmas has forsaken me because he loved the present system of things, and he has gone to Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, Cresʹcens to Ga·laʹti·a, Titus to Dal·maʹtia.
Only Luke is with me. Bring Mark along with you, for he is helpful to me in the ministry.
But I have sent Tychʹi·cus off to Ephʹe·sus.
When you come, bring the cloak I left at Troʹas with Carpus, and the scrolls, especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did me a great deal of harm. Jehovah will repay him according to his deeds.
You too should be on guard against him, for he opposed our message to an excessive degree.
In my first defense no one came to my side, but they all forsook me—may they not be held accountable.
But the Lord stood near me and infused power into me, so that through me the preaching might be fully accomplished and all the nations might hear it; and I was rescued from the lion’s mouth.
The Lord will rescue me from every wicked work and will save me for his heavenly Kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Give my greetings to Prisʹca and Aqʹui·la and the household of On·e·siphʹo·rus.
E·rasʹtus stayed in Corinth, but I left Trophʹi·mus sick at Mi·leʹtus.
Do your utmost to arrive before winter.
Eu·buʹlus sends you his greetings, and so do Puʹdens and Liʹnus and Clauʹdi·a and all the brothers.
The Lord be with the spirit you show. His undeserved kindness be with you.